DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL
MANUAL OF
MENTAL DISORDERS
FOURTH EDITION
DSM-IV
CHUWEU& MORING
\ IRaARY
UUI \ 9 1990
RECEIVED
TMThis page intentionally left blankDIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL
MANUAL OF
MENTAL DISORDERS
FOURTH EDITION
DSM-IV
TM
PUBLISHED BY THE
AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION
WASHINGTON, DCCopyright © 1994 American Psychiatric Association
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Unless authorized in writing by the APA, no part of this book may be
reproduced or used in a manner inconsistent with the APA's copyright. This prohibition applies
to unauthorized uses or reproductions in any form, including electronic applications.
Manufactured in the United States of America on acid-free paper
American Psychiatric Association
1400 K Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20005
Correspondence regarding copyright permissions should be directed to the Division of Publica-
tions and Marketing, American Psychiatric Association, 1400 K Street, N.W., Washington, DC
20005.
DSM and DSM-IV are trademarks of the American Psychiatric Association. Use of these terms is
prohibited without permission of the American Psychiatric Association.
The correct citation for this book is American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association,
1994.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-IV. — 4th ed.
p.
cm.
Prepared by the Task Force on DSM-IV and other committees and work
groups of the American Psychiatric Association.
Includes index.
ISBN 0-89042-061-0 (hard : alk. paper). — ISBN 0-89042-062-9 (paper : alk. paper)
1. Mental illness—Classification. 2. Mental illness—Diagnosis.
I. American Psychiatric Association. II. American Psychiatric
Association. Task Force on DSM-IV. III. Title: DSM-IV.
[DNLM: 1. Mental Disorders—classification. 2. Mental Disorders—
diagnosis.
WM 15 D536 1994]
RC455.2.C4D54 1994
6l6.89'075—dc20
DNLM/DLC
for Library of Congress
94-6304
CIP
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.
First printing 150,000, May 1994
Text Design—-Jane H. Davenport
Manufacturing—R. R. Donnelly & Sons CompanyTo Melvin Sabs bin,
a man for all seasonsThis page intentionally left blankContents
II Task Force on DSM-IV
II Acknowledgments
II Introduction
II Cautionary Statement
II Use of the Manual
ix
xiii
xv
xxvii
1
II DSM-IV Classification 13
II Multiaxial Assessment 25
II Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or
Adolescence 37
II Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
. 123
II Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition 165
II Substance-Related Disorders 175
II Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders 273
II Mood Disorders 317
II Anxiety Disorders 393
II Somatoform Disorders 445
II Factitious Disorders 471
II Dissociative Disorders 477
II Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders 493
II Eating Disorders 539
II Sleep Disorders 551
II Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified 609
II Adjustment Disorders 623II Personality Disorders
II Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention .
II Additional Codes
629
.
.
. 675
687
II Appendixes
Appendix A Decision Trees for Differential Diagnosis Appendix B Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study Appendix C Glossary of Technical Terms 763
Appendix D Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV 773
Appendix E Alphabetical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and
Codes 793
Numerical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and
Codes 803
Appendix F
Appendix G
ICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical
Conditions and Medication-Induced Disorders
689
. . 703
. . . 813
Appendix H DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes 829
Appendix I Outline for Cultural Formulation and Glossary of
Culture-Bound Syndromes 843
DSM-IV Contributors 851
Appendixj
II Index
875TASK FORCE ON DSM-IV
ALLEN FRANCES, M.D.
Chairperson
HAROLD ALAN PINCUS, M.D.
Vice-Chairperson
MICHAEL B. FIRST, M.D.
Editor, Text and Criteria
Nancy Coover Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.
David H. Barlow, Ph.D.
Magda Campbell, M.D.
Dennis P. Cantwell, M.D.
Ellen Frank, Ph.D.
Judith H. Gold, M.D.
John Gunderson, M.D.
Robert E. Hales, M.D.
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
David J. Kupfer, M.D.
Michael R. Liebowitz, M.D.
Juan Enrique Mezzich, M.D., Ph.D.
Peter E. Nathan, Ph.D.
Roger Peele, M.D.
Darrel A. Regier, M.D., M.P.H.
Ruth Ross, M.A.,
Nancy E. Vettorello, M.U.P.,
Wendy Wakefield Davis, Ed.M.,
Cindy D. Jones,
Nancy Sydnor-Greenberg, M.A.,
Myriam Kline, M.S.,
James W. Thompson, M.D., M.P.H.,
A. John Rush, M.D.
Chester W. Schmidt, M.D.
Marc Alan Schuckit, M.D.
David Shaffer, M.D.
Robert L. Spitzer, M.D., Special Adviser
GaryJ. Tucker, M.D.
B. Timothy Walsh, M.D.
Thomas A. Widiger, Ph.D.,
Research Coordinator
Janet B. W. Williams, D.S.W.
John C. Urbaitis, M.D., Assembly Liaison
James J. Hudziak, M.D.,
Resident Fellow (1990-1993)
Junius Gonzales, M.D.,
Resident Fellow (1988-1990)
Science Editor
Administrative Coordinator
Editorial Coordinator
Administrative Assistant
Administrative Consultant
Focused Field Trial Coordinator
Videotape Field Trial Coordinator
ixx
DSM-IV Work Groups
Anxiety Disorders Work Group
Michael R. Liebowitz, M.D., Chairperson
David H. Barlow, Ph.D., Vice-Chairperson
James C. Ballenger, M.D.
Jonathan Davidson, M.D.
Edna Foa, Ph.D.
Abby Fyer, M.D.
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and
Other Cognitive Disorders Work Group
Gary J. Tucker, M.D., Chairperson
Michael Popkin, M.D., Vice-Chairperson
Eric Douglas Caine, M.D.
Marshall Folstein, M.D.
Gary Lloyd Gottlieb, M.D.
Igor Grant, M.D.
Benjamin Liptzin, M.D.
Disorders Usually First Diagnosed During Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence Work Group
David Shaffer, M.D., Co-Chairperson
Magda Campbell, M.D., Co-Chairperson
Susan J. Bradley, M.D.
Dennis P. Cantwell, M.D.
Gabrielle A. Carlson, M.D.
Donald Jay Cohen, M.D.
Barry Garfinkel, M.D.
Rachel Klein, Ph.D.
Benjamin Lahey, Ph.D.
Rolf Loeber, Ph.D.
Jeffrey Newcorn, M.D.
Rhea Paul, Ph.D.
Judith H. L. Rapoport, M.D.
Sir Michael Rutter, M.D.
Fred Volkmar, M.D.
John S. Werry, M.D.
Eating Disorders Work Group
B. Timothy Walsh, M.D., Chairperson
Paul Garfinkel, M.D.
Katherine A. Halmi, M.D.
James Mitchell, M.D.
G. Terence Wilson, Ph.D.
Mood Disorders Work Group
A. John Rush, M.D., Chairperson
Martin B. Keller, M.D., Vice-Chairperson
Mark S. Bauer, M.D.
David Dunner, M.D.
Ellen Frank, Ph.D.
Donald F. Klein, M.D.DSM-IV Work Groups
xi
Multiaxial Issues Work Group
Janet B. W. Williams, D.S.W.,
Chairperson
Howard H. Goldman, M.D., Ph.D.,
Vice-Chairperson
Alan M. Gruenberg, M.D.
Juan Enrique Mezzich, M.D., Ph.D.
Roger Peele, M.D.
Stephen Setterberg, M.D.
Andrew Edward Skodol II, M.D.
Personality Disorders Work Group
John Gunderson, M.D., Chairperson
Robert M. A. Hirschfeld, M.D.,
Vice-Chairperson
Roger Blashfield, Ph.D.
Susan Jean Fiester, M.D.
Theodore Millon, Ph.D.
Bruce Pfohl, M.D.
Tracie Shea, Ph.D.
Larry Siever, M.D.
Thomas A. Widiger, Ph.D.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder Work Group
Judith H. Gold, M.D., Chairperson
Jean Endicott, Ph.D.
Barbara Parry, M.D.
Sally Severino, M.D.
Nada Logan Stotland, M.D.
Ellen Frank, Ph.D., Consultant
Psychiatric Systems Interface Disorders
(Adjustment, Dissociative, Factitious, Impulse-Control, and
Somatoform Disorders and Psychological Factors
Affecting Medical Conditions) Work Group
Robert E. Hales, M.D., Chairperson
C. Robert Cloninger, M.D.,
Vice-Chairperson
Jonathan F. Borus, M.D.
Jack Denning Burke, Jr., M.D., M.P.H.
Joe P. Pagan, M.D.
Steven A. King, M.D.
Ronald L. Martin, M.D.
Katharine Anne Phillips, M.D.
David A. Spiegel, M.D.
Alan Stoudemire, M.D.
James J. Strain, M.D.
Michael G. Wise, M.D.
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders Work Group
Nancy Coover Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.,
Chairperson
John M. Kane, M.D., Vice-Chairperson
Samuel Keith, M.D.
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
Thomas McGlashan, M.D.xii DSM-IV Work Groups
Sexual Disorders Work Group
Chester W. Schmidt, M.D., Chairperson
Raul Schiavi, M.D.
Leslie Schover, Ph.D.
Taylor Seagraves, M.D.
Thomas Nathan Wise, M.D.
Sleep Disorders Work Group
David J. Kupfer, M.D., Chairperson
Charles F. Reynolds III, M.D.,
Vice-Chairperson
Daniel Buysse, M.D.
Roger Peele, M.D.
Quentin Regestein, M.D.
Michael Sateia, M.D.
Michael Thorpy, M.D.
Substance-Related Disorders Work Group
Marc Alan Schuckit, M.D., Chairperson
John E. Helzer, M.D., Vice-Chairperson
Linda B. Cottier, Ph.D.
Thomas Crowley, M.D.
Peter E. Nathan, Ph.D.
George E. Woody, M.D.
Committee on Psychiatric Diagnosis and Assessment
Layton McCurdy, M.D., Chairperson
(1987-1994)
Kenneth Z. Altshuler, M.D. (1987-1992)
Thomas F. Anders, M.D. (1988-1994)
Susan Jane Blumenthal, M.D.
(1990-1993)
Leah Joan Dickstein, M.D. (1988-1991)
Lewis J.Judd, M.D. (1988-1994)
Gerald L. Klerman, M.D. (deceased)
(1988-1991)
Stuart C. Yudofsky, M.D. (1992-1994)
Jack D. Blaine, M.D., Consultant
(1987-1992)
Jerry M. Lewis, M.D., Consultant
(1988-1994)
Daniel J. Luchins, M.D., Consultant
(1987-1991)
Katharine Anne Phillips, M.D.,
Consultant (1992-1994)
Cynthia Pearl Rose, M.D., Consultant
(1990-1994)
Louis Alan Moench, M.D.,
Assembly Liaison (1991-1994)
Steven K. Dobscha, M.D., Resident
Fellow (1990-1992)
Mark Zimmerman, M.D., Resident Fellow
(1992-1994)
Joint Committee of the Board of Trustees
and
Assembly of District Branches on Issues Related to DSM-IV
Ronald A. Shellow, M.D., Chairperson
Harvey Bluestone, M.D.
Leah Joan Dickstein, M.D.
Arthur John Farley, M.D.
Carol Ann Bernstein, M.D.Acknowledgments
D
SM-IV is a team effort. More than 1,000 people (and numerous professional
organizations) have helped us in the preparation of this document. Members of
the Task Force on DSM-IV and DSM-IV Staff are listed on p. ix, members of the DSM-IV
Work Groups are listed on pp. x-xii, and a list of other participants is included in
Appendix J.
The major responsibility for the content of DSM-IV rests with the Task Force on
DSM-IV and members of the DSM-IV Work Groups. They have worked (often much
harder than they bargained for) with a dedication and good cheer that has been
inspirational to us. Bob Spitzer has our special thanks for his untiring efforts and unique
perspective. Norman Sartorius, Darrel Regier, Lewis Judd, Fred Goodwin, and Chuck
Kaelber were instrumental in facilitating a mutually productive interchange between the
American Psychiatric Association and the World Health Organization that has improved
both DSM-IV and ICD-10, and increased their compatibility. We are grateful to Robert
Israel, Sue Meads, and Amy Blum at the National Center for Health Statistics and Andrea
Albaum-Feinstein at the American Health Information Management Association for
suggestions on the DSM-IV coding system. Denis Prager, Peter Nathan, and David Kupfer
helped us to develop a novel data reanalysis strategy that has been supported with
funding from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
Many individuals within the American Psychiatric Association deserve recognition.
Mel Sabshin's special wisdom and grace made even the most tedious tasks seem worth
doing. The American Psychiatric Association Committee on Psychiatric Diagnosis and
Assessment (chaired by Layton McCurdy) provided valuable direction and counsel. We
would also like to thank the American Psychiatric Association Presidents (Drs. Fink,
Pardes, Benedek, Hartmann, English, and Mclntyre) and Assembly Speakers (Drs. Cohen,
Flamm, Hanin, Pfaehler, and Shellow) who helped with the planning of our work.
Carolyn Robinowitz and Jack White, and their respective staffs in the American
Psychiatric Association Medical Director's Office and the Business Administration Office,
have provided valuable assistance in the organization of the project.
Several other individuals have our special gratitude. Wendy Davis, Nancy Vettorello,
and Nancy Sydnor-Greenberg developed and implemented an organizational structure
that has kept this complex project from spinning out of control. We have also been
blessed with an unusually able administrative staff, which has included Elisabeth
Fitzhugh, Willa Hall, Kelly McKinney, Gloria Miele, Helen Stayna, Sarah Tilly, Nina
Rosenthal, Susan Mann, Joanne Mas, and, especially, Cindy Jones. Ruth Ross, our tireless
Science Writer, has been responsible for improving the clarity of expression and
xiiixiv Acknowledgments
organization of DSM-IV. Myriam Kline (Research Coordinator for the NIH-funded DSM-IV
Focused Field Trials), Jim Thompson (Research Coordinator for the MacArthur Founda-
tion-funded Videotape Field Trial), and Sandy Ferris (Assistant Director for the Office
of Research) have made many valuable contributions. We would also like to acknow-
ledge all the other staff persons at the American Psychiatric Association who have helped
with this project. Ron McMillen, Claire Reinburg, Pam Harley, and Jane Davenport of
American Psychiatric Press have provided expert production assistance.
Allen Frances, M.D.
Chair, Task Force on DSM-IV Harold Alan Pincus, M.D.
Vice-Chair, Task Force on DSM-IV
Michael B. First, M.D.
Editor, DSM-IV Text and Criteria Thomas A. Widiger, Ph.D.
Research CoordinatorIntroduction
T
his is the fourth edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or DSM-IV. The utility and credibility of
DSM-IV require that it focus on its clinical, research, and educational purposes and be
supported by an extensive empirical foundation. Our highest priority has been to provide
a helpful guide to clinical practice. We hoped to make DSM-IV practical and useful for
clinicians by striving for brevity of criteria sets, clarity of language, and explicit statements
of the constructs embodied in the diagnostic criteria. An additional goal was to facilitate
research and improve communication among clinicians and researchers. We were also
mindful of the use of DSM-IV for improving the collection of clinical information and
as an educational tool for teaching psychopathology.
An official nomenclature must be applicable in a wide diversity of contexts. DSM-IV
is used by clinicians and researchers of many different orientations (e.g., biological,
psychodynamic, cognitive, behavioral, interpersonal, family/systems). It is used by
psychiatrists, other physicians, psychologists, social workers, nurses, occupational and
rehabilitation therapists, counselors, and other health and mental health professionals.
DSM-IV must be usable across settings—inpatient, outpatient, partial hospital, consulta-
tion-liaison, clinic, private practice, and primary care, and with community populations.
It is also a necessary tool for collecting and communicating accurate public health
statistics. Fortunately, all these many uses are compatible with one another.
DSM-IV was the product of 13 Work Groups (see Appendix J), each of which had
primary responsibility for a section of the manual. This organization was designed to
increase participation by experts in each of the respective fields. We took a number of
precautions to ensure that the Work Group recommendations would reflect the breadth
of available evidence and opinion and not just the views of the specific members. After
extensive consultations with experts and clinicians in each field, we selected Work Group
members who represented a wide range of perspectives and experiences. Work Group
members were instructed that they were to participate as consensus scholars and not as
advocates of previously held views. Furthermore, we established a formal evidence-
based process for the Work Groups to follow.
The Work Groups reported to the Task Force on DSM-IV (see p. ix), which consisted
of 27 members, many of whom also chaired a Work Group. Each of the 13 Work Groups
was composed of 5 (or more) members whose reviews were critiqued by between 50
and 100 advisers, who were also chosen to represent diverse clinical and research
expertise, disciplines, backgrounds, and settings. The involvement of many international
experts ensured that DSM-IV had available the widest pool of information and would
be applicable across cultures. Conferences and workshops were held to provide
xvxvi
Introduction
conceptual and methodological guidance for the DSM-IV effort. These included a
number of consultations between the developers of DSM-IV and the developers of
ICD-10 conducted for the purpose of increasing compatibility between the two systems.
Also held were methods conferences that focused on cultural factors in the diagnosis of
mental disorder, on geriatric diagnosis, and on psychiatric diagnosis in primary care
settings.
To maintain open and extensive lines of communication, the Task Force on DSM-IV
established a liaison with many other components within the American Psychiatric
Association and with more than 60 organizations and associations interested in the
development of DSM-IV (e.g., American Health Information Management Association,
American Nurses' Association, American Occupational Therapy Association, American
Psychoanalytic Association, American Psychological Association, American Psychologi-
cal Society, Coalition for the Family, Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry, National
Association of Social Workers, National Center for Health Statistics, World Health
Organization). We attempted to air issues and empirical evidence early in the process
in order to identify potential problems and differences in interpretation. Exchanges of
information were also made possible through the distribution of a semiannual newsletter
(the DSM-IV Update), the publication of a regular column on DSM-IV in Hospital and
Community Psychiatry, frequent presentations at national and international conferences,
and numerous journal articles.
Two years before the publication of DSM-IV, the Task Force published and widely
distributed the DSM-IV Options Book. This volume presented a comprehensive summary
of the alternative proposals that were being considered for inclusion in DSM-IV in order
to solicit opinion and additional data for our deliberations. We received extensive
correspondence from interested individuals who shared with us additional data and
recommendations on the potential impact of the possible changes in DSM-IV on their
clinical practice, teaching, research, and administrative work. This breadth of discussion
helped us to anticipate problems and to attempt to find the best solution among the
various options. One year before the publication of DSM-IV, a near-final draft of the
proposed criteria sets was distributed to allow for one last critique.
In arriving at final DSM-IV decisions, the Work Groups and the Task Force reviewed
all of the extensive empirical evidence and correspondence that had been gathered. It
is our belief that the major innovation of DSM-IV lies not in any of its specific content
changes but rather in the systematic and explicit process by which it was constructed
and documented. More than any other nomenclature of mental disorders, DSM-IV is
grounded in empirical evidence.
Historical Background
The need for a classification of mental disorders has been clear throughout the history
of medicine, but there has been little agreement on which disorders should be included
and the optimal method for their organization. The many nomenclatures that have been
developed during the past two millennia have differed in their relative emphasis on
phenomenology, etiology, and course as defining features. Some systems have included
only a handful of diagnostic categories; others have included thousands. Moreover, the
various systems for categorizing mental disorders have differed with respect to whether
their principle objective was for use in clinical, research, or statistical settings. BecauseIntroduction
xvii
the history of classification is too extensive to be summarized here, we focus briefly only
on those aspects that have led directly to the development of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) and to the "Mental Disorders" sections in
the various editions of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD).
In the United States, the initial impetus for developing a classification of mental
disorders was the need to collect statistical information. What might be considered the
first official attempt to gather information about mental illness in the United States was
the recording of the frequency of one category—"idiocy/insanity" in the 1840 census.
By the 1880 census, seven categories of mental illness were distinguished—mania,
melancholia, monomania, paresis, dementia, dipsomania, and epilepsy. In 1917, the
Committee on Statistics of the American Psychiatric Association (at that time called the
American Medico-Psychological Association [the name was changed in 19211), together
with the National Commission on Mental Hygiene, formulated a plan that was adopted
by the Bureau of the Census for gathering uniform statistics across mental hospitals.
Although this system devoted more attention to clinical utility than did previous systems,
it was still primarily a statistical classification. The American Psychiatric Association
subsequently collaborated with the New York Academy of Medicine to develop a
nationally acceptable psychiatric nomenclature that would be incorporated within the
first edition of the American Medical Association's Standard Classified Nomenclature of
Disease. This nomenclature was designed primarily for diagnosing inpatients with severe
psychiatric and neurological disorders.
A much broader nomenclature was later developed by the U.S. Army (and modified
by the Veterans Administration) in order to better incorporate the outpatient presenta-
tions of World War II servicemen and veterans (e.g., psychophysiological, personality,
and acute disorders). Contemporaneously, the World Health Organization (WHO)
published the sixth edition of ICD, which, for the first time, included a section for mental
disorders. ICD-6 was heavily influenced by the Veterans Administration nomenclature
and included 10 categories for psychoses, 9 for psychoneuroses, and 7 for disorders of
character, behavior, and intelligence.
The American Psychiatric Association Committee on Nomenclature and Statistics
developed a variant of the ICD-6 that was published in 1952 as the first edition of the
Diagnostic andStatisticalManual: Mental Disorders(DSM-I). DSM-I contained a glossary
of descriptions of the diagnostic categories and was the first official manual of mental
disorders to focus on clinical utility. The use of the term reaction throughout DSM-I
reflected the influence of Adolf Meyer's psychobiological view that mental disorders
represented reactions of the personality to psychological, social, and biological factors.
In part because of the lack of widespread acceptance of the mental disorder
taxonomy contained in ICD-6 and ICD-7, WHO sponsored a comprehensive review of
diagnostic issues that was conducted by the British psychiatrist Stengel. His report can
be credited with having inspired many of the recent advances in diagnostic methodol-
ogy—most especially the need for explicit definitions as a means of promoting reliable
clinical diagnoses. However, the next round of diagnostic revision, which led to DSM-II
and ICD-8, did not follow Stengel's recommendations to any great degree. DSM-II was
similar to DSM-I but eliminated the term reaction.
As had been the case for DSM-I and DSM-II, the development of DSM-III was
coordinated with the development of the next (ninth) version of ICD, which was
published in 1975 and implemented in 1978. Work began on DSM-III in 1974, with
publication in 1980. DSM-III introduced a number of important methodological innova-
tions, including explicit diagnostic criteria, a multiaxial system, and a descriptivexviii
Introduction
approach that attempted to be neutral with respect to theories of etiology. This effort
was facilitated by the extensive empirical work then under way on the construction and
validation of explicit diagnostic criteria and the development of semistructured inter-
views. ICD-9 did not include diagnostic criteria or a multiaxial system largely because
the primary function of this international system was to delineate categories to facilitate
the collection of basic health statistics. In contrast, DSM-III was developed with the
additional goal of providing a medical nomenclature for clinicians and researchers.
Because of dissatisfaction across all of medicine with the lack of specificity in ICD-9, a
decision was made to modify it for use in the United States, resulting in ICD-9-CM (for
Clinical Modification).
Experience with DSM-III revealed a number of inconsistencies in the system and a
number of instances in which the criteria were not entirely clear. Therefore, the American
Psychiatric Association appointed a Work Group to Revise DSM-III, which developed
the revisions and corrections that led to the publication of DSM-III-R in 1987.
The DSM-IV Revision Process
The third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 'Mental Disorders (DSM-III)
represented a major advance in the diagnosis of mental disorders and greatly facilitated
empirical research. The development of DSM-IV has benefited from the substantial
increase in the research on diagnosis that was generated in part by DSM-III and
DSM-III-R. Most diagnoses now have an empirical literature or available data sets that
are relevant to decisions regarding the revision of the diagnostic manual. The Task Force
oh DSM-IV and its Work Groups conducted a three-stage empirical process that included
1) comprehensive and systematic reviews of the published literature, 2) reanalyses of
already-collected data sets, and 3) extensive issue-focused field trials.
Literature Reviews
Two methods conferences were sponsored to articulate for all the Work Groups a
systematic procedure for finding, extracting, aggregating, and interpreting data in a
comprehensive and objective fashion. The initial tasks of each of the DSM-IV Work
Groups were to identify the most pertinent issues regarding each diagnosis and to
determine the kinds of empirical data relevant to their resolution. A Work Group member
or adviser was then assigned the responsibility of conducting a systematic and
comprehensive review of the relevant literature that would inform the resolution of the
issue and also document the text of DSM-IV. The domains considered in making
decisions included clinical utility, reliability, descriptive validity, psychometric perfor-
mance characteristics of individual criteria, and a number of validating variables.
Each literature review specified 1) the issues or aspects of the text and criteria under
consideration and the significance of the issues with respect to DSM-IV; 2) the review
method (including the sources for identifying relevant studies, the number of studies
considered, the criteria for inclusion and exclusion from the review, and the variables
catalogued in each study); 3) the results of the review (including a descriptive summary
of the studies with respect to methodology, design, and substantive correlates of the
findings, the relevant findings, and the analyses conducted on these findings); and 4) the
various options for resolving the issue, the advantages and disadvantages of each option,Introduction
xix
recommendations, and suggestions for additional research that would be needed to
provide a more conclusive resolution.
The goal of the DSM-IV literature reviews was to provide comprehensive and
unbiased information and to ensure that DSM-IV reflects the best available clinical and
research literature. For this reason, we used systematic computer searches and critical
reviews done by large groups of advisers to ensure that the literature coverage was
adequate and that the interpretation of the results was justified. Input was solicited
especially from those persons likely to be critical of the conclusions of the review. The
literature reviews were revised many times to produce as comprehensive and balanced
a result as possible. It must be noted that for some issues addressed by the DSM-IV Work
Groups, particularly those that were more conceptual in nature or for which there were
insufficient data, a review of the empirical literature had limited utility. Despite these
limitations, the reviews were helpful in documenting the rationale and empirical support
for decisions made by the DSM-IV Work Groups.
Data Reanalyses
When a review of the literature revealed a lack of evidence (or conflicting evidence) for
the resolution of an issue, we often made use of two additional resources—data
reanalyses and field trials—to help in making final decisions. Analyses of relevant
unpublished data sets were supported by a grant to the American Psychiatric Association
from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. Most of the 40 data reanalyses
performed for DSM-IV involved the collaboration of several investigators at different
sites. These researchers jointly subjected their data to questions posed by the Work
Groups concerning the criteria included in DSM-III-R or criteria that might be included
in DSM-IV. Data reanalyses also made it possible for Work Groups to generate several
criteria sets that were then tested in the DSM-IV field trials. Although, for the most part,
the data sets used in the reanalyses had been collected as part of epidemiological studies
or treatment or other clinical studies, they were also highly relevant to the nosological
questions facing the DSM-IV Work Groups.
Field Trials
Twelve DSM-IV field trials were sponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH) in collaboration with the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA). The field trials allowed
the DSM-IV Work Groups to compare alternative options and to study the possible
impact of suggested changes. Field trials compared DSM-III, DSM-III-R, ICD-10, and
proposed DSM-IV criteria sets in 5-10 different sites per field trial, with approximately
100 subjects at each site. Diverse sites, with representative groups of subjects from a
range of sociocultural and ethnic backgrounds, were selected to ensure generalizability
of field-trial results and to test some of the most difficult questions in differential
diagnosis. The 12 field trials included more than 70 sites and evaluated more than 6,000
subjects. The field trials collected information on the reliability and performance
characteristics of each criteria set as a whole, as well as of the specific items within each
criteria set. The field trials also helped to bridge the boundary between clinical research
and clinical practice by determining how well suggestions for change that are derived
from clinical research findings apply in clinical practice.xx
Introduction
Criteria for Change
Although it was impossible to develop absolute and infallible criteria for when changes
should be made, there were some principles that guided our efforts. The threshold for
making revisions in DSM-IV was set higher than that for DSM-III and DSM-III-R. Decisions
had to be substantiated by explicit statements of rationale and by the systematic review
of relevant empirical data. To increase the practicality and clinical utility of DSM-IV, the
criteria sets were simplified and clarified when this could be justified by empirical data.
An attempt was made to strike an optimal balance in DSM-IV with respect to historical
tradition (as embodied in DSM-III and DSM-III-R), compatibility with ICD-10, evidence
from reviews of the literature, analyses of unpublished data sets, results of field trials,
and consensus of the field. Although the amount of evidence required to support changes
was set at a high threshold, it necessarily varied across disorders because the empirical
support for the decisions made in DSM-III and DSM-III-R also varied across disorders.
Of course, common sense was necessary, and major changes to solve minor problems
required more evidence than minor changes to solve major problems.
We received suggestions to include numerous new diagnoses in DSM-IV. The
proponents argued that the new diagnoses were necessary to improve the coverage of
the system by including a group of individuals that were undiagnosable in DSM-III-R or
diagnosable only under the Not Otherwise Specified rubric. We decided that, in general,
new diagnoses should be included in the system only after research has established that
they should be included rather than being included to stimulate that research. However,
diagnoses already included in ICD-10 were given somewhat more consideration than
those that were being proposed fresh for DSM-IV. The increased marginal utility, clarity,
and coverage provided by each newly proposed diagnosis had to be balanced against
the cumulative cumbersomeness imposed on the whole system, the paucity of empirical
documentation, and the possible misdiagnosis or misuse that might result. No classifi-
cation of mental disorders can have a sufficient number of specific categories to
encompass every conceivable clinical presentation. The Not Otherwise Specified cate-
gories are provided to cover the not infrequent presentations that are at the boundary
of specific categorical definitions.
The DSM-IV Sourcebook
Documentation has been the essential foundation of the DSM-IV process. The DSM-IV
Sourcebook, published in five volumes, is intended to provide a comprehensive and
convenient reference record of the clinical and research support for the various decisions
reached by the Work Groups and the Task Force. The first three volumes of the
Sourcebook contain condensed versions of the 150 DSM-IV literature reviews. The fourth
volume contains reports of the data reanalyses, and the fifth volume contains reports of
the field trials and a final executive summary of the rationale for the decisions made by
each Work Group. In addition, many papers were stimulated by the efforts toward
empirical documentation in DSM-IV, and these have been published in peer-reviewed
journals.
Relation to ICD-10
The tenth revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems (ICD-10), developed by WHO, was published in 1992, but will probablyIntroduction
xxi
not come into official use in the United States until the late 1990s. Those preparing
ICD-10 and DSM-IV have worked closely to coordinate their efforts, resulting in much
mutual influence. ICD-10 consists of an official coding system and other related clinical
and research documents and instruments. The codes and terms provided in DSM-IV are
fully compatible with both ICD-9-CM and ICD-10 (see Appendix H). The clinical and
research drafts of ICD-10 were thoroughly reviewed by the DSM-IV Work Groups and
suggested important topics for DSM-IV literature reviews and data reanalyses. Draft
versions of the ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Research were included as alternatives to
be compared with DSM-III, DSM-III-R, and suggested DSM-IV criteria sets in the DSM-IV
field trials. The many consultations between the developers of DSM-IV and ICD-10
(which were facilitated by NIMH, NIDA, and NIAAA) were enormously useful in
increasing the congruence and reducing meaningless differences in wording between
the two systems.
Definition of Mental Disorder
Although this volume is titled the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
the term mental disorder unfortunately implies a distinction between "mental" disorders
and "physical" disorders that is a reductionistic anachronism of mind/body dualism. A
compelling literature documents that there is much "physical" in "mental" disorders and
much "mental" in "physical" disorders. The problem raised by the term "mental" disorders
has been much clearer than its solution, and, unfortunately, the term persists in the titl
of DSM-IV because we have not found an appropriate substitute.
Moreover, although this manual provides a classification of mental disorders, it must
be admitted that no definition adequately specifies precise boundaries for the concept
of "mental disorder." The concept of mental disorder, like many other concepts in
medicine and science, lacks a consistent operational definition that covers all situations.
All medical conditions are defined on various levels of abstraction—for example,
structural pathology (e.g., ulcerative colitis), symptom presentation (e.g., migraine),
deviance from a physiological norm (e.g., hypertension), and etiology (e.g., pneumo-
coccal pneumonia). Mental disorders have also been defined by a variety of concepts
(e.g., distress, dyscontrol, disadvantage, disability, inflexibility, irrationality, syndromal
pattern, etiology, and statistical deviation). Each is a useful indicator for a mental
disorder, but none is equivalent to the concept, and different situations call for different
definitions.
Despite these caveats, the definition of mental disorder that was included in DSM-III
and DSM-III-R is presented here because it is as useful as any other available definition
and has helped to guide decisions regarding which conditions on the boundary between
normality and pathology should be included in DSM-IV. In DSM-IV, each of the mental
disorders is conceptualized as a clinically significant behavioral or psychological
syndrome or pattern that occurs in an individual and that is associated with present
distress (e.g., a painful symptom) or disability (i.e., impairment in one or more important
areas of functioning) or with a significantly increased risk of suffering death, pain,
disability, or an important loss of freedom. In addition, this syndrome or pattern must
not be merely an expectable and culturally sanctioned response to a particular event,
for example, the death of a loved one. Whatever its original cause, it must currently be
considered a manifestation of a behavioral, psychological, or biological dysfunction inxxii
Introduction
the individual. Neither deviant behavior (e.g., political, religious, or sexual) nor conflicts
that are primarily between the individual and society are mental disorders unless the
deviance or conflict is a symptom of a dysfunction in the individual, as described above.
A common misconception is that a classification of mental disorders classifies people,
when actually what are being classified are disorders that people have. For this reason,
the text of DSM-IV (as did the text of DSM-III-R) avoids the use of such expressions as
"a schizophrenic" or "an alcoholic" and instead uses the more accurate, but admittedly
more cumbersome, "an individual with Schizophrenia" or "an individual with Alcohol
Dependence."
Issues in the Use of DSM-IV
Limitations of the Categorical Approach
DSM-IV is a categorical classification that divides mental disorders into types based on
criteria sets with defining features. This naming of categories is the traditional method
of organizing and transmitting information in everyday life and has been the fundamental
approach used in all systems of medical diagnosis. A categorical approach to classifica-
tion works best when all members of a diagnostic class are homogeneous, when there
are clear boundaries between classes, and when the different classes are mutually
exclusive. Nonetheless, the limitations of the categorical classification system must be
recognized.
In DSM-IV, there is no assumption that each category of mental disorder is a
completely discrete entity with absolute boundaries dividing it from other mental
disorders or from no mental disorder. There is also no assumption that all individuals
described as having the same mental disorder are alike in all important ways. The
clinician using DSM-IV should therefore consider that individuals sharing a diagnosis
are likely to be heterogeneous even in regard to the defining features of the diagnosis
and that boundary cases will be difficult to diagnose in any but a probabilistic fashion.
This outlook allows greater flexibility in the use of the system, encourages more specific
attention to boundary cases, and emphasizes the need to capture additional clinical
information that goes beyond diagnosis. In recognition of the heterogeneity of clinical
presentations, DSM-IV often includes polythetic criteria sets, in which the individual
need only present with a subset of items from a longer list (e.g., the diagnosis of
Borderline Personality Disorder requires only five out of nine items).
It was suggested that the DSM-IV Classification be organized following a dimensional
model rather than the categorical model used in DSM-III-R. A dimensional system
classifies clinical presentations based on quantification of attributes rather than the
assignment to categories and works best in describing phenomena that are distributed
continuously and that do not have clear boundaries. Although dimensional systems
increase reliability and communicate more clinical information (because they report
clinical attributes that might be subthreshold in a categorical system), they also have
serious limitations and thus far have been less useful than categorical systems in clinical
practice and in stimulating research. Numerical dimensional descriptions are much less
familiar and vivid than are the categorical names for mental disorders. Moreover, there
is as yet no agreement on the choice of the optimal dimensions to be used for
classification purposes. Nonetheless, it is possible that the increasing research on, and
familiarity with, dimensional systems may eventually result in their greater acceptance
both as a method of conveying clinical information and as a research tool.Introduction
xxiii
Use of Clinical Judgment
DSM-IV is a classification of mental disorders that was developed for use in clinical,
educational, and research settings. The diagnostic categories, criteria, and textual
descriptions are meant to be employed by individuals with appropriate clinical training
and experience in diagnosis. It is important that DSM-IV not be applied mechanically
by untrained individuals. The specific diagnostic criteria included in DSM-IV are meant
to serve as guidelines to be informed by clinical judgment and are not meant to be used
in a cookbook fashion. For example, the exercise of clinical judgment may justify giving
a certain diagnosis to an individual even though the clinical presentation falls just short
of meeting the full criteria for the diagnosis as long as the symptoms that are present
are persistent and severe. On the other hand, lack of familiarity with DSM-IV or
excessively flexible and idiosyncratic application of DSM-IV criteria or conventions
substantially reduces its utility as a common language for communication.
Use of DSM-IV in Forensic Settings
When the DSM-IV categories, criteria, and textual descriptions are employed for forensic
purposes, there are significant risks that diagnostic information will be misused or
misunderstood. These dangers arise because of the imperfect fit between the questions
of ultimate concern to the law and the information contained in a clinical diagnosis. In
most situations, the clinical diagnosis of a DSM-IV mental disorder is not sufficient to
establish the existence for legal purposes of a "mental disorder," "mental disability,"
"mental disease," or "mental defect." In determining whether an individual meets a
specified legal standard (e.g., for competence, criminal responsibility, or disability),
additional information is usually required beyond that contained in the DSM-IV
diagnosis. This might include information about the individual's functional impairments
and how these impairments affect the particular abilities in question. It is precisely
because impairments, abilities, and disabilities vary widely within each diagnostic
category that assignment of a particular diagnosis does not imply a specific level of
impairment or disability.
Nonclinical decision makers should also be cautioned that a diagnosis does not carry
any necessary implications regarding the causes of the individual's mental disorder or
its associated impairments. Inclusion of a disorder in the Classification (as in medicine
generally) does not require that there be knowledge about its etiology. Moreover, the
fact that an individual's presentation meets the criteria for a DSM-IV diagnosis does not
carry any necessary implication regarding the individual's degree of control over the
behaviors that may be associated with the disorder. Even when diminished control over
one's behavior is a feature of the disorder, having the diagnosis in itself does not
demonstrate that a particular individual is (or was) unable to control his or her behavior
at a particular time.
It must be noted that DSM-IV reflects a consensus about the classification and
diagnosis of mental disorders derived at the time of its initial publication. New knowledge
generated by research or clinical experience will undoubtedly lead to an increased
understanding of the disorders included in DSM-IV, to the identification of new disorders,
and to the removal of some disorders in future classifications. The text and criteria sets
included in DSM-IV will require reconsideration in light of evolving new information.
The use of DSM-IV in forensic settings should be informed by an awareness of the
risks and limitations discussed above. When used appropriately, diagnoses andxxiv
Introduction
diagnostic information can assist decision makers in their determinations. For example,
when the presence of a mental disorder is the predicate for a subsequent legal
determination (e.g., involuntary civil commitment), the use of an established system of
diagnosis enhances the value and reliability of the determination. By providing a
compendium based on a review of the pertinent clinical and research literature, DSM-IV
may facilitate the legal decision makers' understanding of the relevant characteristics of
mental disorders. The literature related to diagnoses also serves as a check on
ungrounded speculation about mental disorders and about the functioning of a particular
individual. Finally, diagnostic information regarding longitudinal course may improve
decision making when the legal issue concerns an individual's mental functioning at a
past or future point in time.
Ethnic and Cultural Considerations
Special efforts have been made in the preparation of DSM-IV to incorporate an awareness
that the manual is used in culturally diverse populations in the United States and
internationally. Clinicians are called on to evaluate individuals from numerous different
ethnic groups and cultural backgrounds (including many who are recent immigrants).
Diagnostic assessment can be especially challenging when a clinician from one ethnic
or cultural group uses the DSM-IV Classification to evaluate an individual from a different
ethnic or cultural group. A clinician who is unfamiliar with the nuances of an individual's
cultural frame of reference may incorrectly judge as psychopathology those normal
variations in behavior, belief, or experience that are particular to the individual's culture.
For example, certain religious practices or beliefs (e.g., hearing or seeing a deceased
relative during bereavement) may be misdiagnosed as manifestations of a Psychotic
Disorder. Applying Personality Disorder criteria across cultural settings may be especially
difficult because of the wide cultural variation in concepts of self, styles of communica-
tion, and coping mechanisms.
DSM-IV includes three types of information specifically related to cultural consider-
ations: 1) a discussion in the text of cultural variations in the clinical presentations of
those disorders that have been included in the DSM-IV Classification; 2) a description
of culture-bound syndromes that have not been included in the DSM-IV Classification
(these are included in Appendix I); and 3) an outline for cultural formulation designed
to assist the clinician in systematically evaluating and reporting the impact of the
individual's cultural context (also in Appendix I).
The wide international acceptance of DSM suggests that this classification is useful
in describing mental disorders as they are experienced by individuals throughout the
world. Nonetheless, evidence also suggests that the symptoms and course of a number
of DSM-IV disorders are influenced by cultural and ethnic factors. To facilitate its
application to individuals from diverse cultural and ethnic settings, DSM-IV includes a
new section in the text to cover culture-related features. This section describes the ways
in which varied cultural backgrounds affect the content and form of the symptom
presentation (e.g., depressive disorders characterized by a preponderance of somatic
symptoms rather than sadness in certain cultures), preferred idioms for • describing
distress, and information on prevalence when it is available.
The second type of cultural information provided pertains to "culture-bound
syndromes" that have been described in just one, or a few, of the world's societies.
DSM-IV provides two ways of increasing the recognition of culture-bound syndromes:Introduction
xxv
1) some (e.g., amok, ataque de nervios) are included as separate examples in Not
Otherwise Specified categories; and 2) an appendix of culture-bound syndromes
(Appendix I) has been introduced in DSM-IV that includes the name for the condition,
the cultures in which it was first described, and a brief description of the psychopa-
thology.
The provision of a culture-specific section in the DSM-IV text, the inclusion of a
glossary of culture-bound syndromes, and the provision of an outline for cultural
formulation are designed to enhance the cross-cultural applicability of DSM-IV. It is
hoped that these new features will increase sensitivity to variations in how mental
disorders may be expressed in different cultures and will reduce the possible effect of
unintended bias stemming from the clinician's own cultural background.
Use of DSM-IV in Treatment Planning
Making a DSM-IV diagnosis is only the first step in a comprehensive evaluation. To
formulate an adequate treatment plan, the clinician will invariably require considerable
additional information about the person being evaluated beyond that required to make
a DSM-IV diagnosis.
Distinction Between Mental Disorder and
General Medical Condition
The terms mental disorder and general medical condition are used throughout this
manual. The term mental disorder is explained above. The term general medical
condition is used merely as a convenient shorthand to refer to conditions and disorders
that are listed outside the "Mental and Behavioural Disorders" chapter of ICD. It should
be recognized that these are merely terms of convenience and should not be taken to
imply that there is any fundamental distinction between mental disorders and general
medical conditions, that mental disorders are unrelated to physical or biological factors
or processes, or that general medical conditions are unrelated to behavioral or
psychosocial factors or processes.
Organization of the Manual
The manual begins with instructions concerning the use of the manual (p. 1), followed
by the DSM-IV Classification (pp. 13-24), which provides a systematic listing of the
official codes and categories. Next is a description of the DSM-IV multiaxial system for
diagnosis (pp. 25-35). This is followed by the diagnostic criteria for each of the DSM-IV
disorders accompanied by descriptive text (pp. 37-687). Finally, DSM-IV includes
10 appendixes.This page intentionally left blankCautionary Statement
T
he specified diagnostic criteria for each mental disorder are offered as guidelines
for making diagnoses, because it has been demonstrated that the use of such criteria
enhances agreement among clinicians and investigators. The proper use of these criteria
requires specialized clinical training that provides both a body of knowledge and clinical
skills.
These diagnostic criteria and the DSM-IV Classification of mental disorders reflect a
consensus of current formulations of evolving knowledge in our field. They do not
encompass, however, all the conditions for which people may be treated or that may
be appropriate topics for research efforts.
The purpose of DSM-IV is to provide clear descriptions of diagnostic categories in
order to enable clinicians and investigators to diagnose, communicate about, study, and
treat people with various mental disorders. It is to be understood that inclusion here,
for clinical and research purposes, of a diagnostic category such as Pathological
Gambling or Pedophilia does not imply that the condition meets legal or other
nonmedical criteria for what constitutes mental disease, mental disorder, or mental
disability. The clinical and scientific considerations involved in categorization of these
conditions as mental disorders may not be wholly relevant to legal judgments, for
example, that take into account such issues as individual responsibility, disability
determination, and competency.
xxviiThis page intentionally left blankUse of the Manual
Coding and Reporting Procedures
Diagnostic Codes
The official coding system in use in the United States as of publication of this manual
is the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification
(ICD-9-CM). Most DSM-IV disorders have a numerical ICD-9-CM code that appears
several times: 1) preceding the name of the disorder in the Classification (pp. 13-24),
2) at the beginning of the text section for each disorder, and 3) accompanying the criteria
set for each disorder. For some diagnoses (e.g., Mental Retardation, Substance-Induced
Mood Disorder), the appropriate code depends on further specification and is listed after
the text and criteria set for the disorder. The names of some disorders are followed by
alternative terms enclosed in parentheses, which, in most cases, were the DSM-III-R
names for the disorders.
The use of diagnostic codes is fundamental to medical record keeping. Diagnostic
coding facilitates data collection and retrieval and compilation of statistical information
Codes also are often required to report diagnostic data to interested third parties,
including governmental agencies, private insurers, and the World Health Organization.
For example, in the United States, the use of these codes has been mandated by the
Health Care Financing Administration for purposes of reimbursement under the Medicare
system.
Subtypes (some of which are coded in the fifth digit) and specifiers are provided
for increased specificity. Subtypes define mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive
phenomenological subgroupings within a diagnosis and are indicated by the instruction
"specify type" in the criteria set. For example, Delusional Disorder is subtyped based
on the content of the delusions, with seven subtypes provided: Erotomanic Type,
Grandiose Type, Jealous Type, Persecutory Type, Somatic Type, Mixed Type, and
Unspecified Type. In contrast, specifiers are not intended to be mutually exclusive or
jointly exhaustive and are indicated by the instruction "specify if" in the criteria set (e.g.,
for Social Phobia, the instruction notes "Specify if: Generalized"). Specifiers provide an
opportunity to define a more homogeneous subgrouping of individuals with the disorder
who share certain features (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, With Melancholic Features).
Although a fifth digit is sometimes assigned to code a subtype or specifier (e.g., 290.12
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset, With Delusions) or severity (296.21
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Mild), the majority of subtypes and specifiers
included in DSM-IV cannot be coded within the ICD-9-CM system and are indicated
12
Use of the Manual
only by including the subtype or specifier after the name of the disorder (e.g., Social
Phobia, Generalized).
Severity and Course Specifiers
A DSM-IV diagnosis is usually applied to the individual's current presentation and is not
typically used to denote previous diagnoses from which the individual has recovered.
The following specifiers indicating severity and course may be listed after the diagnosis:
Mild, Moderate, Severe, In Partial Remission, In Full Remission, and Prior History.
The specifiers Mild, Moderate, and Severe should be used only when the full criteria
for the disorder are currently met. In deciding whether the presentation should be
described as mild, moderate, or severe, the clinician should take into account the number
and intensity of the signs and symptoms of the disorder and any resulting impairment
in occupational or social functioning. For the majority of disorders, the following
guidelines may be used:
Mild. Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, and symptoms result in no more than minor impairment in social or
occupational functioning.
Moderate. Symptoms or functional impairment between "mild" and "severe"
are present.
Severe. Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis, or
several symptoms that are particularly severe, are present, or the symptoms result
in marked impairment in social or occupational functioning.
In Partial Remission. The full criteria for the disorder were previously met,
but currently only some of the symptoms or signs of the disorder remain.
In Full Remission. There are no longer any symptoms or signs of the disorder,
but it is still clinically relevant to note the disorder—for example, in an individual
with previous episodes of Bipolar Disorder who has been symptom free on
lithium for the past 3 years. After a period of time in full remission, the clinician
may judge the individual to be recovered and, therefore, would no longer code
the disorder as a current diagnosis. The differentiation of In Full Remission from
recovered requires consideration of many factors, including the characteristic
course of the disorder, the length of time since the last period of disturbance, the
total duration of the disturbance, and the need for continued evaluation or
prophylactic treatment.
Prior History. For some purposes, it may be useful to note a history of the
criteria having been met for a disorder even when the individual is considered
to be recovered from it. Such past diagnoses of mental disorder would be
indicated by using the specifier Prior History (e.g., Separation Anxiety Disorder,
Prior History, for an individual with a history of Separation Anxiety Disorder who
has no current disorder or who currently meets criteria for Panic Disorder).
Specific criteria for defining Mild, Moderate, and Severe have been provided for the
following: Mental Retardation, Conduct Disorder, Manic Episode, and Major Depressive
Episode. Specific criteria for defining In Partial Remission and In Full Remission have
been provided for the following: Manic Episode, Major Depressive Episode, and
Substance Dependence.Use of the Manual
Recurrence
Not infrequently in clinical practice, individuals after a period of time in which the full
criteria for the disorder are no longer met (i.e., in partial or full remission or recovery)
may develop symptoms that suggest a recurrence of their original disorder but that do
not yet meet the full threshold for that disorder as specified in the criteria set. It is a
matter of clinical judgment as to how best to indicate the presence of these symptoms.
The following options are available:
• If the symptoms are judged to be a new episode of a recurrent condition, the
disorder may be diagnosed as current (or provisional) even before the full criteria
have been met (e.g., after meeting criteria for a Major Depressive Episode for
only 10 days instead of the 14 days usually required).
• If the symptoms are judged to be clinically significant but it is not clear whether
they constitute a recurrence of the original disorder, the appropriate Not
Otherwise Specified category may be given.
• If it is judged that the symptoms are not clinically significant, no additional current
or provisional diagnosis is given, but "Prior History" may be noted (see p. 2).
Principal Diagnosis/Reason for Visit
When more than one diagnosis for an individual is given in an inpatient setting, the
principal diagnosis is the condition established after study to be chiefly responsible for
occasioning the admission of the individual. When more than one diagnosis is given for
an individual in an outpatient setting, the reason for visit is the condition that is chiefly
responsible for the ambulatory care medical services received during the visit. In most
cases, the principal diagnosis or the reason for visit is also the main focus of attention
or treatment. It is often difficult (and somewhat arbitrary) to determine which diagnosis
is the principal diagnosis or the reason for visit, especially in situations of "dual diagnosis"
(a substance-related diagnosis like Amphetamine Dependence accompanied by a
non-substance-related diagnosis like Schizophrenia). For example, it may be unclear
which diagnosis should be considered "principal" for an individual hospitalized with
both Schizophrenia and Amphetamine Intoxication, because each condition may have
contributed equally to the need for admission and treatment.
Multiple diagnoses can be reported in a multiaxial fashion (see p. 33) or in a nonaxial
fashion (see p. 35). When the principal diagnosis is an Axis I disorder, this is indicated
by listing it first. The remaining disorders are listed in order of focus of attention and
treatment. When a person has both an Axis I and an Axis II diagnosis, the principal
diagnosis or the reason for visit will be assumed to be on Axis I unless the Axis II
diagnosis is followed by the qualifying phrase "(Principal Diagnosis)" or "(Reason for
Visit)."
Provisional Diagnosis
The specifier provisional can be used when there is a strong presumption that the full
criteria will ultimately be met for a disorder, but not enough information is available to
make a firm diagnosis. The clinician can indicate the diagnostic uncertainty by recording
"(Provisional)" following the diagnosis. For example, the individual appears to have a
Major Depressive Disorder, but is unable to give an adequate history to establish that4
Use of the Manual
the full criteria are met. Another use of the term provisional is for those situations in
which differential diagnosis depends exclusively on the duration of illness. For example,
a diagnosis of Schizophreniform Disorder requires a duration of less than 6 months and
can only be given provisionally if assigned before remission has occurred.
Use of Not Otherwise Specified Categories
Because of the diversity of clinical presentations, it is impossible for the diagnostic
nomenclature to cover every possible situation. For this reason, each diagnostic class
has at least one Not Otherwise Specified (NOS) category and some classes have several
NOS categories. There are four situations in which an NOS diagnosis may be appropriate:
• The presentation conforms to the general guidelines for a mental disorder in the
diagnostic class, but the symptomatic picture does not meet the criteria for any
of the specific disorders. This would occur either when the symptoms are below
the diagnostic threshold for one of the specific disorders or when there is an
atypical or mixed presentation.
• The presentation conforms to a symptom pattern that has not been included in
the DSM-IV Classification but that causes clinically significant distress or impair-
ment. Research criteria for some of these symptom patterns have been included
in Appendix B ("Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study"), in which
case a page reference to the suggested research criteria set in Appendix B is
provided.
• There is uncertainty about etiology (i.e., whether the disorder is due to a general
medical condition, is substance induced, or is primary).
• There is insufficient opportunity for complete data collection (e.g., in emergency
situations) or inconsistent or contradictory information, but there is enough
information to place it within a particular diagnostic class (e.g., the clinician
determines that the individual has psychotic symptoms but does not have enough
information to diagnose a specific Psychotic Disorder).
Ways of Indicating Diagnostic Uncertainty
The following table indicates the various ways in which a clinician may indicate
diagnostic uncertainty:
Term Examples of clinical situations
V Codes (for Other Conditions That May Be a
Focus of Clinical Attention) Insufficient information to know whether or
not a presenting problem is attributable to a
mental disorder, e.g., Academic Problem;
Adult Antisocial Behavior
Information inadequate to make any
diagnostic judgment about an Axis I
diagnosis or condition
Information inadequate to make any
diagnostic judgment about an Axis II
diagnosis
(continued)
799-9 Diagnosis or Condition Deferred on
Axis I
799-9 Diagnosis Deferred on Axis IIUse of the Manual
Term
5
Examples of clinical situations
300.9 Unspecified Mental Disorder
(nonpsychotic)
298.9 Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified
[Class of disorder] Not Otherwise Specified
e.g., Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified
[Specific diagnosis] (Provisional)
e.g., Schizophreniform Disorder (Provisional)
Enough information available to rule out a
Psychotic Disorder, but further specification
is not possible
Enough information available to determine
the presence of a Psychotic Disorder, but
further specification is not possible
Enough information available to indicate the
class of disorder that is present, but further
specification is not possible, either because
there is not sufficient information to make a
more specific diagnosis or because the
clinical features of the disorder do not meet
the criteria for any of the specific categories
in that class
Enough information available to make a
"working" diagnosis, but the clinician wishes
to indicate a significant degree of diagnostic
uncertainty
Frequently Used Criteria
Criteria Used to Exclude Other Diagnoses
and to Suggest Differential Diagnoses
Most of the criteria sets presented in this manual include exclusion criteria that are
necessary to establish boundaries between disorders and to clarify differential diagnoses.
The several different wordings of exclusion criteria in the criteria sets throughout DSM-IV
reflect the different types of possible relationships among disorders:
• "Criteria have never been met f o r . . . " This exclusion criterion is used to
define a lifetime hierarchy between disorders. For example, a diagnosis of Major
Depressive Disorder can no longer be given once a Manic Episode has occurred
and must be changed to a diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder.
• "Criteria are not met for . . ." This exclusion criterion is used to establish a
hierarchy between disorders (or subtypes) defined cross-sectionally. For example,
the specifier With Melancholic Features takes precedence over With Atypical
Features for describing the current Major Depressive Episode.
• "does not occur exclusively during the course of..." This exclusion
criterion prevents a disorder from being diagnosed when its symptom presenta-
tion occurs only during the course of another disorder. For example, dementia
is not diagnosed separately if it occurs only during delirium; Conversion Disorder
is not diagnosed separately if it occurs only during Somatization Disorder; Bulimia
Nervosa is not diagnosed separately if it occurs only during episodes of Anorexia
Nervosa. This exclusion criterion is typically used in situations in which the
symptoms of one disorder are associated features or a subset of the symptoms
of the preempting disorder. The clinician should consider periods of partial
remission as part of the "course of another disorder." It should be noted that the6
Use of the Manual
excluded diagnosis can be given at times when it occurs independently (e.g.,
when the excluding disorder is in full remission).
• "not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of
abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition." This exclusion
criterion is used to indicate that a substance-induced and general medical etiology
must be considered and ruled out before the disorder can be diagnosed (e.g.,
Major Depressive Disorder can be diagnosed only after etiologies based on
substance use and a general medical condition have been ruled out).
• "not better accounted for by . . ." This exclusion criterion is used to indicate
that the disorders mentioned in the criterion must be considered in the differential
diagnosis of the presenting psychopathology and that, in boundary cases, clinical
judgment will be necessary to determine which disorder provides the most
appropriate diagnosis. In such cases, the "Differential Diagnosis" section of the
text for the disorders should be consulted for guidance.
The general convention in DSM-IV is to allow multiple diagnoses to be assigned for
those presentations that meet criteria for more than one DSM-IV disorder. There are
three situations in which the above-mentioned exclusion criteria help to establish a
diagnostic hierarchy (and thus prevent multiple diagnoses) or to highlight differential
diagnostic considerations (and thus discourage multiple diagnoses):
• When a Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition or a Substance-
Induced Disorder is responsible for the symptoms, it preempts the diagnosis of
the corresponding primary disorder with the same symptoms (e.g., Cocaine-
Induced Mood Disorder preempts Major Depressive Disorder). In such cases, an
exclusion criterion containing the phrase "not due to the direct physiological
effects o f . . . " is included in the criteria set for the primary disorder.
• When a more pervasive disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia) has among its defining
symptoms (or associated symptoms) what are the defining symptoms of a less
pervasive disorder (e.g., Dysthymic Disorder), one of the following three
exclusion criteria appears in the criteria set for the less pervasive disorder,
indicating that only the more pervasive disorder is diagnosed: "Criteria have never
been met for . . .," "Criteria are not met for . . .," "does not occur exclusively during
the course of. . . . "
• When there are particularly difficult differential diagnostic boundaries, the phrase
"not better accounted for by . . . " is included to indicate that clinical judgment is
necessary to determine which diagnosis is most appropriate. For example, Panic
Disorder With Agoraphobia includes the criterion "not better accounted for by
Social Phobia" and Social Phobia includes the criterion "not better accounted for
by Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia" in recognition of the fact that this is a
particularly difficult boundary to draw. In some cases, both diagnoses might be
appropriate.
Criteria for Substance-Induced Disorders
It is often difficult to determine whether presenting symptomatology is substance
induced, that is, the direct physiological consequence of Substance Intoxication or
Withdrawal, medication use, or toxin exposure. In an effort to provide some assistance
in making this determination, the two criteria listed below have been added to each ofUse of the Manual
the Substance-Induced Disorders. These criteria are intended to provide general
guidelines, but at the same time allow for clinical judgment in determining whether or
not the presenting symptoms are best accounted for by the direct physiological effects
of the substance. For further discussion of this issue, see p. 192.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of either (1) or (2):
(1) the symptoms developed during, or within a month of, Substance
Intoxication or Withdrawal
(2) medication use is etiologically related to the disturbance
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by a disorder that is not
substance induced. Evidence that the symptoms are better accounted
for by a disorder that is not substance induced might include the
following: the symptoms precede the onset of the substance use (or
medication use); the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time
(e.g., about a month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe
intoxication, or are substantially in excess of what would be expected
given the type, duration, or amount of the substance used; or there is
other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent non-
substance-induced disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance-
related episodes).
Criteria for a Mental Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition
The criterion listed below is necessary to establish the etiological requirement for each
of the Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition (e.g., Mood Disorder Due
to Hypothyroidism). For further discussion of this issue, see p. 165.
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of a
general medical condition.
Criteria for Clinical Significance
The definition of mental disorder in the introduction to DSM-IV requires that there be
clinically significant impairment or distress. To highlight the importance of considering
this issue, the criteria sets for most disorders include a clinical significance criterion
(usually worded " . . . causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning"). This criterion helps establish the
threshold for the diagnosis of a disorder in those situations in which the symptomatic
presentation by itself (particularly in its milder forms) is not inherently pathological and
may be encountered in individuals for whom a diagnosis of "mental disorder" would
be inappropriate. Assessing whether this criterion is met, especially in terms of role
function, is an inherently difficult clinical judgment. Reliance on information from family
members and other third parties (in addition to the individual) regarding the individual's
performance is often necessary.8
Use of the Manual
Types of Information in the DSM-IV Text
The text of DSM-IV systematically describes each disorder under the following headings:
"Diagnostic Features"; "Subtypes and/or Specifiers"; "Recording Procedures"; "Associated
Features and Disorders"; "Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features"; "Prevalence";
"Course"; "Familial Pattern"; and "Differential Diagnosis." When no information is
available for a section, that section is not included. In some instances, when many of
the specific disorders in a group of disorders share common features, this information
is included in the general introduction to the group.
Diagnostic Features.
illustrative examples.
This section clarifies the diagnostic criteria and often provides
Subtypes and/or Specifiers. This section provides definitions and brief discussions
concerning applicable subtypes and/or specifiers.
Recording Procedures. This section provides guidelines for reporting the name of
the disorder and for selecting and recording the appropriate ICD-9-CM diagnostic code.
It also includes instructions for applying any appropriate subtypes and/or specifiers.
Associated Features and Disorders.
parts:
This section is usually subdivided into three
• Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. This section includes
clinical features that are frequently associated with the disorder but that are not
considered essential to making the diagnosis. In some cases, these features were
considered for inclusion as possible diagnostic criteria but were insufficiently
sensitive or specific to be included in the final criteria set. Also noted in this
section are other mental disorders associated with the disorder being discussed.
It is specified (when known) if these disorders precede, co-occur with, or are
consequences of the disorder in question (e.g., Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Dementia is a consequence of chronic Alcohol Dependence). If available,
information on predisposing factors and complications is also included in this
section.
• Associated laboratory findings. This section provides information on three types
of laboratory findings that may be associated with the disorder: 1) those associated
laboratory findings that are considered to be "diagnostic" of the disorder—for
example, polysomnographic findings in certain sleep disorders; 2) those associ-
ated laboratory findings that are not considered to be diagnostic of the disorder
but that have been noted to be abnormal in groups of individuals with the disorder
relative to control subjects—for example, ventricle size on computed tomography
as a validator of the construct of Schizophrenia; and 3) those laboratory findings
that are associated with the complications of a disorder—for example, electrolyte
imbalances in individuals with Anorexia Nervosa.
• Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions. This
section includes information about symptoms elicited by history, or findings noted
during physical examination, that may be of diagnostic significance but that are
not essential to the diagnosis—for example, dental erosion in Bulimia Nervosa.
Also included are those disorders that are coded outside the "Mental andUse of the Manual
Behavioural Disorders" chapter of ICD that are associated with the disorder being
discussed. As is done for associated mental disorders, the type of association (i.e.,
precedes, co-occurs with, is a consequence of) is specified if known—for
example, that cirrhosis is a consequence of Alcohol Dependence.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features. This section provides guidance for
the clinician concerning variations in the presentation of the disorder that may be
attributable to the individual's cultural setting, developmental stage (e.g., infancy,
childhood, adolescence, adulthood, late life), or gender. This section also includes
information on differential prevalence rates related to culture, age, and gender (e.g., sex
ratio).
Prevalence. This section provides available data on point and lifetime prevalence,
incidence, and lifetime risk. These data are provided for different settings (e.g.,
community, primary care, outpatient mental health clinics, and inpatient psychiatric
settings) when this information is known.
Course. This section describes the typical lifetime patterns of presentation and
evolution of the disorder. It contains information on typical age at onset and mode of
onset(e.g., abrupt or insidious) of the disorder; episodic versus continuous course; single
episode versus recurrent; duration, characterizing the typical length of the illness and
its episodes; and progression, describing the general trend of the disorder over time (e.g.,
stable, worsening, improving).
Familial Pattern. This section describes data on the frequency of the disorder among
first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder compared with the frequency
in the general population. It also indicates other disorders that tend to occur more
frequently in family members of those with the disorder.
Differential Diagnosis. This section discusses how to differentiate this disorder from
other disorders that have some similar presenting characteristics.
DSM-IV Organizational Plan
The DSM-IV disorders are grouped into 16 major diagnostic classes (e.g., Substance-
Related Disorders, Mood Disorders, Anxiety Disorders) and one additional section,
"Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention."
The first section is devoted to "Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence." This division of the Classification according to age at
presentation is for convenience only and is not absolute. Although disorders in this
section are usually first evident in childhood and adolescence, some individuals
diagnosed with disorders located in this section (e.g., Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder) may not present for clinical attention until adulthood. In addition, it is not
uncommon for the age at onset for many disorders placed in other sections to be during
childhood or adolescence (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Schizophrenia, Generalized
Anxiety Disorder). Clinicians who work primarily with children and adolescents should
therefore be familiar with the entire manual, and those who work primarily with adults
should also be familiar with this section.10
Use of the Manual
The next three sections—"Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive
Disorders"; "Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition"; and "Substance-
Related Disorders"—were grouped together in DSM-III-R under the single heading of
"Organic Mental Syndromes and Disorders." The term "organic mental disorder" is no
longer used in DSM-IV because it incorrectly implies that the other mental disorders in
the manual do not have a biological basis. As in DSM-IIIdR, these sections are placed
before the remaining disorders in the manual because of their priority in differential
diagnosis (e.g., substance-related causes of depressed mood must be ruled out before
making a diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder). To facilitate differential diagnosis,
complete lists of Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-
Related Disorders appear in these sections, whereas the text and criteria for these
disorders are placed in the diagnostic sections with disorders with which they share
phenomenology. For example, the text and criteria for Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder and Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition are included in the
Mood Disorders section.
The organizing principle for all the remaining sections (except for Adjustment
Disorders) is to group disorders based on their shared phenomenological features in
order to facilitate differential diagnosis. The "Adjustment Disorders" section is organized
differently in that these disorders are grouped based on their common etiology (e.g.,
maladaptive reaction to a stressor). Therefore, the Adjustment Disorders include a variety
of heterogeneous clinical presentations (e.g., Adjustment Disorder With Depressed
Mood, Adjustment Disorder With Anxiety, Adjustment Disorder With Disturbance of
Conduct).
Finally, DSM-IV includes a section for "Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of
Clinical Attention."
DSM-IV includes 10 appendixes:
Appendix A: Decision Trees for Differential Diagnosis. This appendix contains
six decision trees (for Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition, Substance-
Induced Disorders, Psychotic Disorders, Mood Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, and
Somatoform Disorders). Their purpose is to aid the clinician in differential diagnosis and
in understanding the hierarchical structure of the DSM-IV Classification.
Appendix B: Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study.
This appen-
dix contains a number of proposals that were suggested for possible inclusion in DSM-IV.
Brief texts and research criteria sets are provided for the following: postconcussional
disorder, mild neurocognitive disorder, caffeine withdrawal, postpsychotic depressive
disorder of Schizophrenia, simple deteriorative disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disor-
der, minor depressive disorder, recurrent brief depressive disorder, mixed anxiety-
depressive disorder, factitious disorder by proxy, dissociative trance disorder,
binge-eating disorder, depressive personality disorder, passive-aggressive personality
disorder, Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism, Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome, Neuro-
leptic-Induced Acute Dystonia, Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia, Neuroleptic-
Induced Tardive Dyskinesia, and Medication-Induced Postural Tremor. In addition,
alternative dimensional descriptors for Schizophrenia and an alternative Criterion B for
Dysthymic Disorder are included. Finally, three proposed axes (Defensive Functioning
Scale, Global Assessment of Relational Functioning [GARF] Scale, and Social and
Occupational Functioning Assessment Scale [SOFAS]) are provided.Use of the Manual
11
Appendix C: Glossary of Technical Terms. This appendix contains glossary def-
initions of selected terms to assist users of the manual in the application of the criteria
sets.
Appendix D: Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV. This appendix indicates
the major changes from DSM-III-R that have been included in the DSM-IV terms and
categories.
Appendix E: Alphabetical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes. This ap-
pendix lists the DSM-IV disorders and conditions (with their ICD-9-CM codes) in
alphabetical order. It has been included to facilitate the selection of diagnostic codes.
Appendix F: Numerical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes. This appen-
dix lists the DSM-IV disorders and conditions (with their ICD-9-CM codes) in numerical
order by code. It has been included to facilitate recording of diagnostic terms.
Appendix G: ICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions and
Medication-Induced Disorders. This appendix contains a list of ICD-9-CM codes
for selected general medical conditions and has been provided to facilitate coding on
Axis III. This appendix also provides ICD-9-CM E-codes for selected medications,
prescribed at therapeutic close levels, that cause Substance-Induced Disorders. The
E-codes may optionally be coded on Axis I immediately following the related disorder
(e.g., 292.39 Oral Contraceptive-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features;
E932.2 oral contraceptives).
Appendix H: DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes. As of the publication of
this manual (in early 1994), the official coding system in use in the United States is the
International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-
CM). At some point within the next several years, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services will require for reporting purposes in the United States the use of codes
from the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems,
Tenth Revision (ICD-10). To facilitate this transition process, this appendix contains the
complete DSM-IV Classification with ICD-10 diagnostic codes.
Appendix I: Outline for Cultural Formulation and Glossary of Culture-Bound
Syndromes. This appendix is divided into two sections. The first provides an outline
for cultural formulation designed to assist the clinician in systematically evaluating and
reporting the impact of the individual's cultural context. The second is a glossary of
culture-bound syndromes.
Appendix J: DSM-IV Contributors. This appendix lists the names of the advisers
and field-trial participants and other individuals and organizations that contributed to
the development of DSM-IV.This page intentionally left blankDS1VMV Classification
Disorders Usually First
Diagnosed In Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence (37)
NOS = Not Otherwise Specified.
An x appearing in a diagnostic code indi-
cates that a specific code number is re-
quired.
MENTAL RETARDATION (39)
Note: These are coded on Axis II.
317
Mild Mental Retardation (41)
318.0 Moderate Mental Retardation (41)
318.1 Severe Mental Retardation (41)
318.2 Profound Mental Retardation (41)
319
Mental Retardation, Severity
Unspecified (42)
An ellipsis ( . . . ) is used in the names of
certain disorders to indicate that the name
of a specific mental disorder or general
medical condition should be inserted
when recording the name (e.g., 293.0 De-
lirium Due to Hypothyroidism).
Numbers in parentheses are page
numbers.
LEARNING DISORDERS (46)
315.00 Reading Disorder (48)
315.1 Mathematics Disorder (50)
315.2 Disorder of Written Expression (51)
315.9 Learning Disorder NOS (53)
If criteria are currently met, one of the
following severity specifiers may be noted
after the diagnosis:
Mild
Moderate
Severe
MOTOR SKILLS DISORDER
315.4 Developmental Coordination
Disorder (53)
COMMUNICATION DISORDERS (55)
315.31 Expressive Language
Disorder (55)
315.31 Mixed Receptive-Expressive
Language Disorder (58)
315.39 Phonological Disorder (61)
307.0 Stuttering (63)
307.9 Communication Disorder
NOS (65)
If criteria are no longer met, one of the
following specifiers may be noted:
In Partial Remission
In Full Remission
Prior History
PERVASIVE DEVELOPMENTAL
DISORDERS (65)
299.00 Autistic Disorder (66)
299.80 Rett's Disorder (71)
1314
DSM-IV Classification
299-10 Childhood Disintegrative
Disorder (73)
299.80 Asperger's Disorder (75)
299.80 Pervasive Developmental
Disorder NOS (77)
ATTENTION-DEFICIT AND
DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR
DISORDERS (78)
314.xx Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (78)
.01
Combined Type
.00
Predominantly Inattentive Type
.01
Predominantly
Hyperactive-Impulsive Type
314.9 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder NOS (85)
312.8 Conduct Disorder (85)
Specify type: Childhood-Onset Type/
Adolescent-Onset Type
313.81 Oppositional Defiant
Disorder (91)
312.9 Disruptive Behavior Disorder
NOS (94)
FEEDING AND EATING DISORDERS
OF INFANCY OR EARLY
CHILDHOOD (94)
307.52 Pica (95)
307.53 Rumination Disorder (96)
307.59 Feeding Disorder of Infancy or
Early Childhood (98)
TIC DISORDERS (100)
307.23 Tourette's Disorder (101)
307.22 Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic
Disorder (103)
307.21 Transient Tic Disorder (104)
Specify if: Single Episode/Recurrent
307.20 Tic Disorder NOS (105)
ELIMINATION DISORDERS (106)
.- Encopresis (106)
787.6
With Constipation and
Overflow Incontinence
307.7
Without Constipation and
Overflow Incontinence
307.6 Enuresis (Not Due to a General
Medical Condition) (108)
Specify type: Nocturnal Only/Diurnal
Only/Nocturnal and Diurnal
OTHER DISORDERS OF INFANCY,
CHILDHOOD, OR ADOLESCENCE
309.21 Separation Anxiety Disorder (110)
Specify if: Early Onset
313.23 Selective Mutism (114)
313.89 Reactive Attachment Disorder
of Infancy or Early
Childhood (116)
Specify type: Inhibited Type/
Disinhibited Type
307.3
Stereotypic Movement
Disorder (118)
Specify if With Self-Injurious Behavior
313.9
Disorder of Infancy, Childhood,
or Adolescence NOS (121)
Delirium, Dementia, and
Amnestic and Other Cognitive
Disorders (123)
DELIRIUM (124)
293.0 Delirium Due to ... [Indicate
the General Medical
Condition] (127)
.- Substance Intoxication Delirium
(129) (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
000000000000000
.- Substance Withdrawal Delirium
(129) (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
00000000000000
.- Delirium Due to Multiple
Etiologies (code each of the
specific etiologies) (132)
780.09 Delirium NOS (133)
DEMENTIA (133)
290.xx Dementia of the Alzheimer's
Type, With Early Onset (also
code 331-0 Alzheimer's disease
on Axis III) (139)
.10
Uncomplicated
.11
With Delirium
.12
With Delusions
.13
With Depressed Mood
Specify if With Behavioral Disturbance+DSM-IV Classification
290.xx Dementia of the Alzheimer's
Type, With Late Onset (also
code 331.0 Alzheimer's disease
on Axis III) (139)
.0
Uncomplicated
.3
With Delirium
.20
With Delusions
.21
With Depressed Mood
Specify if: With Behavioral Disturbance
290.xx Vascular Dementia (143)
.40
Uncomplicated
.41
With Delirium
.42
With Delusions
.43
With Depressed Mood
Specify if: With Behavioral Disturbance
294.9
Dementia Due to HIV Disease
(also code 043.1 HIV infection
affecting central nervous system
on Axis III) (148)
294.1 Dementia Due to Head Trauma
(also code 854.00 head injury
on Axis III) (148)
294.1 Dementia Due to Parkinson's
Disease (also code 332.0
Parkinson's disease on
Axis III) (148)
294.1
Dementia Due to Huntington's
Disease (also code 333-4
Huntington 's disease on
Axis III) (149)
290.10 Dementia Due to Pick's Disease
(also code 331-1 Pick's disease
on Axis III) (149)
290.10 Dementia Due to
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (also
code 046.1 Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease on Axis III) (150)
294.1 Dementia Due to ... [Indicate
the General Medical Condition
not listed above] (also code the
general medical condition on
Axis III) (151)
294.8
15
Substance-Induced Persisting
Dementia (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
00000000000000000000
Dementia Due to Multiple
Etiologies (code each of the
specific etiologies) (154)
Dementia NOS (155)
AMNESTIC DISORDERS (156)
294.0 Amnestic Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (158)
Specify if: Transient/Chronic
.-
294.8
Substance-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder (refer to
Substance-Related Disorders for
substance-specific codes) (l6l)
Amnestic Disorder NOS (163)
OTHER COGNITIVE DISORDERS (163)
294.9 Cognitive Disorder NOS (163)
Mental Disorders Due to m
000000
led (165)0
293.89 Catatonic Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (169)
310.1 Personality Change Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (171)
Specify type: Labile Type/Disinhibited
Type/Aggressive Type/Apathetic Type/
Paranoid Type/Other Type/Combined
Type/Unspecified Type
293-9
Mental Disorder NOS Due to . . .
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (174)16
DSM-IV Classification
Substance-Related
Disorders (175)
a
The following specifiers may be applied to
Substance Dependence:
With Physiological Dependence/Without
Physiological Dependence
Early Full Remission/Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission/Sustained Partial
Remission
On Agonist Therapy/In a Controlled
Environment
The following specifiers apply to
Substance-Induced Disorders as noted:
'With Onset During Intoxication/ w With Onset
During Withdrawal
ALCOHOL-RELATED DISORDERS (194)
Alcohol Use Disorders
303.90 Alcohol Dependence 11 (195)
305.00 Alcohol Abuse (196)
Alcohol-Induced Disorders
303.00 Alcohol Intoxication (196)
291.8 Alcohol Withdrawal (197)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
291.0
291.0
291.2
291.1
291.x
.5
.3
291.8
291.8
291.8
291.8
291.9
Alcohol Intoxication Delirium (129)
Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium (129)
Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder (l6l)
Alcohol-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
With Delusions IlW
With Hallucinations 1 ^
Alcohol-Induced Mood
Disorder ! ' w (370)
Alcohol-Induced Anxiety
Disorder I>w (439)
Alcohol-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
Alcohol-Induced Sleep
Disorder ! ' w (601)
Alcohol-Related Disorder
NOS (204)
AMPHETAMINE (OR AMPHETAMINE-
UKE)-RELATED DISORDERS (204)
Amphetamine Use Disorders
304.40 Amphetamine Dependence 3 (206)
305.70 Amphetamine Abuse (206)
Amphetamine-Induced Disorders
292.89 Amphetamine Intoxication (207)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0 Amphetamine Withdrawal (208)
292.81 Amphetamine Intoxication
Delirium (129)
292.xx Amphetamine-Induced
Psychotic Disorder (310)
.11
With Delusions 1
.12
With Hallucinations 1
292.84 Amphetamine-Induced Mood
Disorder 1>w (370)
292.89 Amphetamine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
292.89 Amphetamine-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
292.89 Amphetamine-Induced Sleep
Disorder 1 ^ (601)
292.9
Amphetamine-Related Disorder
NOS (211)
CAFFEINE-RELATED DISORDERS (212)
Caffeine-Induced Disorders
305.90 Caffeine Intoxication (212)
292.89 Caffeine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
292.89 Caffeine-Induced Sleep
Disorder 1 (601)
292.9
Caffeine-Related Disorder
NOS (215)
CANNABIS-RELATED DISORDERS (215)
Cannabis Use Disorders
304.30 Cannabis Dependence 3 (216)
305.20 Cannabis Abuse (217)
Cannabis-Induced Disorders
292.89 Cannabis Intoxication (217)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.81 Cannabis Intoxication
Delirium (129)DSM-IV Classification
292.xx Cannabis-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.11
With Delusions 1
.12
With Hallucinations 1
292.89 Cannabis-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
292.9
Cannabis-Related Disorder
NOS (221)
COCAINE-RELATED DISORDERS (221)
Cocaine Use Disorders
304.20 Cocaine Dependence a (222)
305.60 Cocaine Abuse (223)
Cocaine-Induced Disorders
292.89 Cocaine Intoxication (223)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0 Cocaine Withdrawal (225)
292.81 Cocaine Intoxication
Delirium (129)
292.xx Cocaine-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.11
With Delusions 1
.12
With Hallucinations 1
292.84 Cocaine-Induced Mood
Disorder 1 ^ (370)
292.89 Cocaine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder I)W (439)
292.89 Cocaine-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
292.89 Cocaine-Induced Sleep
Disorder IiW (601)
292.9
Cocaine-Related Disorder
NOS (229)
HALLUCINOGEN-RELATED
DISORDERS (229)
Hallucinogen Use Disorders
304.50 Hallucinogen Dependence a (230)
305.30 Hallucinogen Abuse (231)
Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
292.89 Hallucinogen Intoxication (232)
292.89 Hallucinogen Persisting
Perception Disorder
(Flashbacks) (233)
17
292.81 Hallucinogen Intoxication
Delirium (129)
292.xx Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.11
With Delusions 1
.12
With Hallucinations 1
292.84 Hallucinogen-Induced Mood
Disorder 1 (370)
292.89 Hallucinogen-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
292.9
Hallucinogen-Related Disorder
NOS (236)
INHALANT-RELATED DISORDERS (236)
Inhalant Use Disorders
304.60 Inhalant Dependence" (238)
305.90 Inhalant Abuse (238)
Inhalant-Induced Disorders
292.89 Inhalant Intoxication (239)
292.81 Inhalant Intoxication
Delirium (129)
292.82 Inhalant-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
292.xx Inhalant-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.11
With Delusions 1
.12
With Hallucinations 1
292.84 Inhalant-Induced Mood
Disorder 1 (370)
292.89 Inhalant-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
292.9
Inhalant-Related Disorder
NOS (242)
NICOTINE-RELATED DISORDERS (242)
Nicotine Use Disorder
305.10 Nicotine Dependence a (243)
Nicotine-Induced Disorder
292.0 Nicotine Withdrawal (244)
292.9 Nicotine-Related Disorder
NOS (247)
OPIOID-RELATED DISORDERS (247)
Opioid Use Disorders
304.00 Opioid Dependence" (248)
305.50 Opioid Abuse (249)18
DSM-IV Classification
Opioid-Induced Disorders
292.89 Opioid Intoxication (249)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
305.40 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Abuse (263)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
292.0 Opioid Withdrawal (250)
292.81 Opioid Intoxication Delirium (129) Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders
292.89 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
292.xx Opioid-Induced Psychotic
Intoxication (263)
Disorder (310)
292.0 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
.11
With Delusions 1
Withdrawal (264)
.12
With Hallucinations 1
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.84 Opioid-Induced Mood
1
292.81
Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Disorder (370)
Intoxication
Delirium (129)
292.89 Opioid-Induced Sexual
1
292.81
Sedative,
Hypnotic,
or Anxiolytic
Dysfunction (519)
Withdrawal
Delirium
(129)
292.89 Opioid-Induced Sleep
IlW
292.82 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Disorder (601)
Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
292.9 Opioid-Related Disorder NOS (255)
292.83 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting
PHENCYCLIDINE (OR
Amnestic Disorder (l6l)
PHENCYCLIDINE-LIKE)-
292.xx Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
RELATED DISORDERS (255)
Anxiolytic-Induced Psychotic
Phencyclidine Use Disorders
Disorder (310)
21
304.90 Phencyclidine Dependence (256)
.11
With Delusions I>w
305.90 Phencyclidine Abuse (257)
. 12
With Hallucinations 1 ^
292.84 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders
Anxiolytic-Induced Mood
292.89 Phencyclidine Intoxication (257)
Disorder I>w (370)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.89 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
292.81 Phencyclidine Intoxication
Anxiolytic-Induced Anxiety
Delirium (129)
Disorder w (439)
292.xx Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic
292.89 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Disorder (310)
1
Anxiolytic-Induced Sexual
.11
With Delusions
1
Dysfunction 1 (519)
.12
With Hallucinations
292.89 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
292.84 Phencyclidine-Induced Mood
1
Anxiolytic-Induced Sleep
Disorder (370)
Disorder I>w (601)
292.89 Phencyclidine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
292.9
Phencyclidine-Related Disorder
NOS (261)
SEDATIVE-, HYPNOTIC-, OR
ANXIOLYTIC-RELATED
DISORDERS (261)
Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Use Disorders
304.10 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Dependence 11 (262)
292.9
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Related
Disorder NOS (269)
POLYSUBSTANCE-RELATED
DISORDER
304.80 Polysubstance Dependence* (270)DSM-IV Classification
OTHER (OR UNKNOWN)
SUBSTANCE-RELATED
DISORDERS (270)
Other (or Unknown) Substance
Use Disorders
304.90 Other (or Unknown) Substance
Dependence a (176)
305.90 Other (or Unknown) Substance
Abuse (182)
Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Disorders
292.89 Other (or Unknown) Substance
Intoxication (183)
19
Schizophrenia and Other
Psychotic Disorders (273)
295.xx Schizophrenia (274)
The following Classification of Longitudi-
nal Course applies to all subtypes of Schizo-
phrenia:
Episodic With Interepisode Residual Symptoms
(specify if: With Prominent Negative
SymptomsVEpisodic With No Interepisode
Residual Symptoms/Continuous (specify if:
With Prominent Negative Symptoms)
Single Episode In Partial Remission (specify if:
With Prominent Negative Symptoms)/Single
Episode In Full Remission
Other or Unspecified Pattern
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0
292.81
292.82
292.83
292.xx
.11
.12
292.84
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.9
Other (or Unknown) Substance
Withdrawal (184)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Delirium (129)
Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder (161)
Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
With Delusions 1 ^
With Hallucinations 1 ^
Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Mood Disorder w (370)
Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 ^ (439)
Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Sleep Disorder ! ' w (601)
Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Related Disorder NOS (272)
.30
.10
.20
.90
.60
Paranoid Type (287)
Disorganized Type (287)
Catatonic Type (288)
Undifferentiated Type (289)
Residual Type (289)
295.40 Schizophreniform Disorder (290)
Specify if: Without Good Prognostic
Features/With Good Prognostic Features
295.70 Schizoaffective Disorder (292)
Specify type: Bipolar Type/
Depressive Type
297.1 Delusional Disorder (296)
Specify type: Erotomanic
Type/Grandiose Type/Jealous
Type/Persecutory Type/Somatic
Type/Mixed Type/Unspecified Type
Brief Psychotic Disorder (302)
Specify if: With Marked
Stressor(s)/Without Marked
Stressor(s)/With Postpartum
Onset
298.8
297.3 Shared Psychotic Disorder (305)
293-xx Psychotic Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (306)
.81
With Delusions
.82
With Hallucinations
.- Substance-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
specific codes) (310)
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
298.9
Psychotic Disorder NOS (315)20
DSM-IV Classification
Mood Disorders (317)
Code current state of Major Depressive
Disorder or Bipolar I Disorder in fifth digit:
1 = Mild
2 = Moderate
3 = Severe Without Psychotic Features
4 = Severe With Psychotic Features
Specify: Mood-Congruent Psychotic
Features/Mood-Incongruent Psychotic
Features
5 = In Partial Remission
6 = In Full Remission
0 = Unspecified
301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder (363)
296.80 Bipolar Disorder NOS (366)
293.83 Mood Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (366)
Specify type: With Depressive
Features/With Major Depressive-Like
Episode/With Manic Features/With
Mixed Features
.-
The following specifiers apply (for current
or most recent episode) to Mood Disorders
as noted:
a
Severity/Psychotic/Remission
Specifiers/'Chronic/With Catatonic
Features/'with Melancholic Features/ e With
Atypical Features/With Postpartum Onset
Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
specific codes) (370)
Specify type: With Depressive
Features/With Manic Features/With
Mixed Features
Specify if With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
296.90 Mood Disorder NOS (375)
The following specifiers apply to Mood
Disorders as noted:
g
h
With or Without Full Interepisode Recovery/
With Seasonal Pattern/With Rapid Cycling
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS
296.xx Major Depressive Disorder, (339)
.2x
Single Episode a ' b ' c ' d ' e ' f
.3x
Recurrent a ' b ' c ' d ' e ' f ' 8 ' h
300.4 Dysthymic Disorder (345)
Specify if: Early Onset/Late Onset
Specify: With Atypical Features
311 Depressive Disorder NOS (350)
Anxiety Disorders (393)
300.01 Panic Disorder Without
Agoraphobia (397)
300.21 Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia (397)
300.22 Agoraphobia Without History of
Panic Disorder (403)
300.29 Specific Phobia (405)
BIPOLAR DISORDERS
296.xx Bipolar I Disorder, (350)
.Ox
Single Manic Episode a>c>f
Specify if Mixed
.40
.4x
.6x
Most Recent Episode
Hypomanic 8 ' h>1
Most Recent Episode
Manic a,c,f,g,h,i
Most Recent Episode
Mixeda,c,f,g,h,i
.5x
Most Recent Episode
Depressed a - b ' c ' d ' e ' f ' g ' h ' i
.7
Most Recent Episode
Unspecified 8 ' 11 ' 1
296.89 Bipolar II Disorder a ' b ' c ' d ' e ' f ' 8 ' h - i (359)
Specify (current or most recent
episode): Hypomanic/Depressed
300.23
300.3
Specify type: Animal Type/Natural
Environment Type/ Blood-Injection-
Injury Type/Situational Type/Other Type
Social Phobia (411)
Specify if Generalized
Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder (417)
Specify if With Poor Insight
309.81 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (424)
Specify if Acute/Chronic
Specify if With Delayed Onset
308.3 Acute Stress Disorder (429)
300.02 Generalized Anxiety
Disorder (432)
293.89 Anxiety Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (436)
Specify if With Generalized Anxiety/
With Panic Attacks/With Obsessive-
Compulsive SymptomsDSM-IV Classification
Substance-Induced Anxiety
Disorder (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
specific codes) (439)
Specify if: With Generalized
Anxiety/With Panic Attacks/With
Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms/
With Phobic Symptoms
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
300.00 Anxiety Disorder NOS (444)
0000
300.81 Somatization Disorder (446)
300.81 Undifferentiated Somatoform
Disorder (450)
300.11 Conversion Disorder (452)
Specify type: With Motor Symptom or
Deficit/With Sensory Symptom or
Deficit/With Seizures or
Convulsions/With Mixed
Presentation
307-xx Pain Disorder (458)
.80
Associated With
Psychological Factors
.89
Associated With Both
Psychological Factors and a
300.7
General Medical Condition
Specify if: Acute/Chronic
Hypochondriasis (462)
Specify if: With Poor Insight
300.7 Body Dysmorphic Disorder (466)
300.81 Somatoform Disorder NOS (468)
Factitious Disorders (471)
300.xx Factitious Disorder (471)
.16
With Predominantly
Psychological Signs and
Symptoms
.19
With Predominantly Physical
Signs and Symptoms
.19
With Combined Psychological
and Physical Signs and
Symptoms
300.19 Factitious Disorder NOS (475)
21
00000000
300.12
300.13
300.14
300.6
300.15
Dissociative Amnesia (478)
Dissociative Fugue (481)
Dissociative Identity Disorder (484)
Depersonalization Disorder (488)
Dissociative Disorder NOS (490)
Sexual and Gender
Identity Disorders (493)
SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS (493)
The following specifiers apply to all
primary Sexual Dysfunctions:
Lifelong Type/Acquired Type
Generalized Type/Situational Type
Due to Psychological Factors/Due to
Combined Factors
Sexual Desire Disorders
302.71 Hypoactive Sexual Desire
Disorder (496)
302.79 Sexual Aversion Disorder (499)
Sexual Arousal Disorders
302.72 Female Sexual Arousal
Disorder (500)
302.72 Male Erectile Disorder (502)
Orgasmic Disorders
302.73 Female Orgasmic Disorder (505)
302.74 Male Orgasmic Disorder (507)
302.75 Premature Ejaculation (509)
Sexual Pain Disorders
302.76 Dyspareunia (Not Due to a
General Medical Condition) (511)
306.51 Vaginismus (Not Due to a
General Medical Condition) (513)
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General
Medical Condition (515)
625.8 Female Hypoactive Sexual
Desire Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
608.89 Male Hypoactive Sexual
Desire Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)22
DSM-IV Classification
607.84 Male Erectile Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
625.0 Female Dyspareunia Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
608.89 Male Dyspareunia Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
625.8 Other Female Sexual Dysfunction
Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition] (515)
608.89 Other Male Sexual Dysfunction
Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition] (515)
-.-
Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
00000000000000000000
Specify if: With Impaired Desire/
With Impaired Arousal/With Impaired
Orgasm/With Sexual Pain
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication
302.70 Sexual Dysfunction NOS (522)
PARAPHHIAS (522)
302.4 Exhibitionism (525)
302.81 Fetishism (526)
302.89 Frotteurism (527)
302.2 Pedophilia (527)
Specify if: Sexually Attracted to
Males/Sexually Attracted to Females/
Sexually Attracted to Both
Specify if Limited to Incest
Specify type: Exclusive Type/
Nonexclusive Type
GENDER IDENTITY DISORDERS (532)
302.xx Gender Identity Disorder (532)
.6
in Children
.85
in Adolescents or Adults
Specify if Sexually Attracted to Males/
Sexually Attracted to Females/Sexually
Attracted to Both/Sexually Attracted to
Neither
302.6 Gender Identity Disorder
NOS (538)
302.9 Sexual Disorder NOS (538)
Eating Disorders (539)
307.1
Anorexia Nervosa (539)
Specify type: Restricting Type;
Binge-Eating/Purging Type
307.51 Bulimia Nervosa (545)
Specify type: Purging Type/
Nonpurging Type
307.50 Eating Disorder NOS (550)
Sleep Disorders (551)
PRIMARY SLEEP DISORDERS (553)
Dyssomnias (553)
307.42 Primary Insomnia (553)
307.44 Primary Hypersomnia (557)
Specify if Recurrent
347
Narcolepsy (562)
780.59 Breathing-Related Sleep
Disorder (567)
307.45 Circadian Rhythm Sleep
Disorder (573)
Specify type: Delayed Sleep Phase
Type/Jet Lag Type/Shift Work Type/
Unspecified Type
302.83 Sexual Masochism (529)
302.84 Sexual Sadism (530) 307.47 Dyssomnia NOS (579)
302.3 Parasomnias (579)
307.47 Nightmare Disorder (580)
307.46 Sleep Terror Disorder (583)
307.46 Sleepwalking Disorder (587)
307.47 Parasomnia NOS (592)
Transvestic Fetishism (530)
Specify if: With Gender Dysphoria
302.82 Voyeurism (532)
302.9 Paraphilia NOS (532)DSM-IV Classification
SLEEP DISORDERS RELATED TO
ANOTHER MENTAL DISORDER (592)
307.42 Insomnia Related to ...
[Indicate the Axis I or Axis II
Disorder] (592)
307.44 Hypersomnia Related to ...
[Indicate the Axis I or Axis II
Disorder] (592)
OTHER SLEEP DISORDERS
780.xx Sleep Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (597)
.52
Insomnia Type
.54
Hypersomnia Type
.59
Parasomnia Type
.59
Mixed Type
.- Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
(refer to Substance-Related
Disorders for substance-specific
codes) (601)
Specify type: Insomnia Type/
Hypersomnia Type/Parasomnia Type/
Mixed Type
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
Impulse-Control Disorders Not
Elsewhere Classified (609)
312.34
312.32
312.33
312.31
312.39
312.30
Intermittent Explosive Disorder (609)
Kleptomania (612)
Pyromania (614)
Pathological Gambling (615)
Trichotillomania (618)
Impulse-Control Disorder NOS (621)
Adjustment Disorders (623)
309.xx Adjustment Disorder (623)
.0
With Depressed Mood
.24
With Anxiety
.28
With Mixed Anxiety and
Depressed Mood
.3
With Disturbance of Conduct
.4
With Mixed Disturbance of
Emotions and Conduct
.9
Unspecified
Specify if: Acute/Chronic
23
Personality Disorders (629)
Note:
301.0
301.20
301.22
301.7
301.83
301.50
301.81
301.82
301.6
301.4
301.9
These are coded on Axis II.
Paranoid Personality Disorder (634)
Schizoid Personality Disorder (638)
Schizotypal Personality
Disorder (641)
Antisocial Personality Disorder (645)
Borderline Personality
Disorder (650)
Histrionic Personality
Disorder (655)
Narcissistic Personality
Disorder (658)
Avoidant Personality
Disorder (662)
Dependent Personality
Disorder (665)
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality
Disorder (669)
Personality Disorder NOS (673)
Other Conditions That May
Be a Focus of Clinical
Attention (675)
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS
AFFECTING MEDICAL
CONDITION (675)
316
. . . [Specified Psychological Factor]
Affecting . . . [Indicate the
General Medical Condition] (675)
Choose name based on nature of
factors:
Mental Disorder Affecting Medical
Condition
Psychological Symptoms Affecting
Medical Condition
Personality Traits or Coping Style
Affecting Medical Condition
Maladaptive Health Behaviors
Affecting Medical Condition
Stress-Related Physiological
Response Affecting Medical
Condition
Other or Unspecified
Psychological Factors
Affecting Medical Condition24
DSM-IV Classification
MEDICATION-INDUCED
MOVEMENT DISORDERS (678)
332.1 Neuroleptic-Induced
Parkinsonism (679)
333.92 Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome (679)
333-7 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute
Dystonia (679)
333.99 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute
Akathisia (679)
333.82 Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive
Dyskinesia (679)
333.1 Medication-Induced Postural
Tremor (680)
333.90 Medication-Induced Movement
Disorder NOS (680)
OTHER MEDICATION-INDUCED
DISORDER
995.2 Adverse Effects of Medication
NOS (680)
RELATIONAL PROBLEMS (680)
V61.9 Relational Problem Related to
a Mental Disorder or General
Medical Condition (681)
V61.20 Parent-Child Relational
Problem (681)
V61.1 Partner Relational Problem (681)
V61.8 Sibling Relational Problem (681)
V62.81 Relational Problem NOS (681)
PROBLEMS RELATED TO ABUSE
OR NEGLECT (682)
V61.21 Physical Abuse of Child (682)
(code 995.5 if focus of attention
is on victim)
V61.21 Sexual Abuse of Child (682)
(code 995.5 if focus of attention
is on victim)
V61.21 Neglect of Child (682)
(code 995.5 if focus of attention
is on victim)
V6l. 1 Physical Abuse of Adult (682)
(code 995.81 if focus of attention
is on victim)
V61.1 Sexual Abuse of Adult (682)
(code 995.81 if focus of attention
is on victim)
ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS THAT
MAY BE A FOCUS OF CLINICAL
ATTENTION (683)
V15.81 Noncompliance With
Treatment (683)
V65.2 Malingering (683)
V71.01 Adult Antisocial Behavior (683)
V71.02 Child or Adolescent Antisocial
Behavior (684)
V62.89 Borderline Intellectual
Functioning (684)
Note: This is coded on Axis II.
780.9
V62.82
V62.3
V62.2
313.82
V62.89
V62.4
V62.89
Age-Related Cognitive Decline (684)
Bereavement (684)
Academic Problem (685)
Occupational Problem (685)
Identity Problem (685)
Religious or Spiritual Problem (685)
Acculturation Problem (685)
Phase of Life Problem (685)
Additional Codes
300.9
Unspecified Mental Disorder
(nonpsychotic) (687)
V71.09 No Diagnosis or Condition on
Axis I (687)
799.9 Diagnosis or Condition Deferred
on Axis I (687)
V71.09 No Diagnosis on Axis II (687)
799.9 Diagnosis Deferred on Axis II (687)
Multiaxial System
Axis I
Clinical Disorders
Other Conditions That May Be a
Focus of Clinical Attention
Axis II Personality Disorders
Mental Retardation
Axis III General Medical Conditions
Axis IV Psychosocial and Environmental
Problems
Axis V Global Assessment of FunctioningMultiaxial Assessment
A
xmultiaxial system involves an assessment on several axes, each of which refers to
a different domain of information that may help the clinician plan treatment and
predict outcome. There are five axes included in the DSM-IV multiaxial classification:
Axis I
Axis II
Axis III
Axis IV
Axis V
Clinical Disorders
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Personality Disorders
Mental Retardation
General Medical Conditions
Psychosocial and Environmental Problems
Global Assessment of Functioning
The use of the multiaxial system facilitates comprehensive and systematic evaluation
with attention to the various mental disorders and general medical conditions, psycho-
social and environmental problems, and level of functioning that might be overlooked
if the focus were on assessing a single presenting problem. A multiaxial system provides
a convenient format for organizing and communicating clinical information, for capturing
the complexity of clinical situations, and for describing the heterogeneity of individuals
presenting with the same diagnosis. In addition, the multiaxial system promotes the
application of the biopsychosocial model in clinical, educational, and research settings.
The rest of this section provides a description of each of the DSM-IV axes. In some
settings or situations, clinicians may prefer not to use the multiaxial system. For this
reason, guidelines for reporting the results of a DSM-IV assessment without applying
the formal multiaxial system are provided at the end of this section.
Axis I: Clinical Disorders
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Axis I is for reporting all the various disorders or conditions in the Classification except
for the Personality Disorders and Mental Retardation (which are reported on Axis II).
The major groups of disorders to be reported on Axis I are listed in the box below. Also
reported on Axis I are Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention.
When an individual has more than one Axis I disorder, all of these should be reported
(for examples, see p. 33). If more than one Axis I disorder is present, the principal
diagnosis or the reason for visit (see p. 3) should be indicated by listing it first. When
2526
Multiaxial Assessment
an individual has both an Axis I and an Axis II disorder, the principal diagnosis or the
reason for visit will be assumed to be on Axis I unless the Axis II diagnosis is followed
by the qualifying phrase "(Principal Diagnosis)" or "(Reason for Visit)." If no Axis I
disorder is present, this should be coded as V71.09. If an Axis I diagnosis is deferred,
pending the gathering of additional information, this should be coded as 799-9.
•
Axis I
•
Clinical Disorders
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
(excluding Mental Retardation, which is diagnosed on Axis II)
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition
Substance-Related Disorders
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
Mood Disorders
Anxiety Disorders
Somatoform Disorders
Factitious Disorders
Dissociative Disorders
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Eating Disorders
Sleep Disorders
Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified
Adjustment Disorders
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Axis II: Personality Disorders
Mental Retardation
Axis II is for reporting Personality Disorders and Mental Retardation. It may also be used
for noting prominent maladaptive personality features and defense mechanisms. The
listing of Personality Disorders and Mental Retardation on a separate axis ensures that
consideration will be given to the possible presence of Personality Disorders and Mental
Retardation that might otherwise be overlooked when attention is directed to the usually
more florid Axis I disorders. The coding of Personality Disorders on Axis II should not
be taken to imply that their pathogenesis or range of appropriate treatment is funda-
mentally different from that for the disorders coded on Axis I. The disorders to be
reported on Axis II are listed in the box below.
In the common situation in which an individual has more than one Axis II diagnosis,
all should be reported (for examples, see p. 33). When an individual has both an Axis I
and an Axis II diagnosis and the Axis II diagnosis is the principal diagnosis or the reason
for visit, this should be indicated by adding the qualifying phrase "(Principal Diagnosis)"Multiaxial Assessment
27
or "(Reason for Visit)" after the Axis II diagnosis. If no Axis II disorder is present, this
should be coded as V71.09. If an Axis II diagnosis is deferred, pending the gathering of
additional information, this should be coded as 799-9-
Axis II may also be used to indicate prominent maladaptive personality features that
do not meet the threshold for a Personality Disorder (in such instances, no code number
should be used—see Example 3 on p. 33). The habitual use of maladaptive defense
mechanisms may also be indicated on Axis II (see Appendix B, p. 751, for definitions
and Example 1 on p. 33).
• Axis II •
Personality Disorders
Mental Retardation
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Borderline Personality Disorder
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Dependent Personality Disorder
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality
Disorder
Personality Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified
Mental Retardation
Axis III: General Medical Conditions
Axis III is for reporting current general medical conditions that are potentially relevant
to the understanding or management of the individual's mental disorder. These
conditions are classified outside the "Mental Disorders" chapter of ICD-9-CM (and outside
Chapter V of ICD-10). A listing of the broad categories of general medical conditions is
given in the box below. (For a more detailed listing including the specific ICD-9-CM
codes, refer to Appendix G.)
As discussed in the "Introduction," the multiaxial distinction among Axis I, II, and
III disorders does not imply that there are fundamental differences in their conceptual-
ization, that mental disorders are unrelated to physical or biological factors or processes,
or that general medical conditions are unrelated to behavioral or psychosocial factors
or processes. The purpose of distinguishing general medical conditions is to encourage
thoroughness in evaluation and to enhance communication among health care providers.
General medical conditions can be related to mental disorders in a variety of ways.
In some cases it is clear that the general medical condition is directly etiological to the
development or worsening of mental symptoms and that the mechanism for this effect
is physiological. When a mental disorder is judged to be a direct physiological
consequence of the general medical condition, a Mental Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition should be diagnosed on Axis I and the general medical condition
should be recorded on both Axis I and Axis III. For example, when hypothyroidism is
a direct cause of depressive symptoms, the designation on Axis I is 293.83 Mood Disorder
Due to Hypothyroidism, With Depressive Features, and the hypothyroidism is listed28
Multiaxial Assessment
again and coded on Axis III as 244.9 (see Example 3, p. 33). For a further discussion,
see p. 165.
In those instances in which the etiological relationship between the general medical
condition and the mental symptoms is insufficiently clear to warrant an Axis I diagnosis
of Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, the appropriate mental disorder
(e.g., Major Depressive Disorder) should be listed and coded on Axis I; the general
medical condition should only be coded on Axis III.
There are other situations in which general medical conditions are recorded on Axis
III because of their importance to the overall understanding or treatment of the individual
with the mental disorder. An Axis I disorder may be a psychological reaction to an Axis
III general medical condition (e.g., the development of 309-0 Adjustment Disorder With
Depressed Mood as a reaction to the diagnosis of carcinoma of the breast). Some general
medical conditions may not be directly related to the mental disorder but nonetheless
have important prognostic or treatment implications (e.g., when the diagnosis on Axis
I is 296.2 Major Depressive Disorder and on Axis III is 427.9 arrhythmia, the choice of
pharmacotherapy is influenced by the general medical condition; or when a person with
diabetes mellitus is admitted to the hospital for an exacerbation of Schizophrenia and
insulin management must be monitored).
When an individual has more than one clinically relevant Axis III diagnosis, all
should be reported. For examples, see p. 33. If no Axis III disorder is present, this should
be indicated by the notation "Axis III: None." If an Axis III diagnosis is deferred, pending
the gathering of additional information, this should be indicated by the notation "Axis III
Deferred."
• Axis III •
General Medical Conditions (with ICD-9-CM codes)
Infectious and Parasitic Diseases (001-139)
Neoplasms (140-239)
Endocrine, Nutritional, and Metabolic Diseases and Immunity Disorders
(240-279)
Diseases of the Blood and Blood-Forming Organs (280-289)
Diseases of the Nervous System and Sense Organs (320-389)
Diseases of the Circulatory System (390-459)
Diseases of the Respiratory System (460-519)
Diseases of the Digestive System (520-579)
Diseases of the Genitourinary System (580-629)
Complications of Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the Puerperium (630-676)
Diseases of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue (680-709)
Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue (710-739)
Congenital Anomalies (740-759)
Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period (760-779)
Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-Defined Conditions (780-799)
Injury and Poisoning (800-999)Multiaxial Assessment
29
Axis IV: Psychosocial and Environmental Problems
Axis IV is for reporting psychosocial and environmental problems that may affect the
diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of mental disorders (Axes I and II). A psychosocial
or environmental problem may be a negative life event, an environmental difficulty or
deficiency, a familial or other interpersonal stress, an inadequacy of social support or
personal resources, or other problem relating to the context in which a person's
difficulties have developed. So-called positive stressors, such as job promotion, should
be listed only if they constitute or lead to a problem, as when a person has difficulty
adapting to the new situation. In addition to playing a role in the initiation or
exacerbation of a mental disorder, psychosocial problems may also develop as a
consequence of a person's psychopathology or may constitute problems that should be
considered in the overall management plan.
When an individual has multiple psychosocial or environmental problems, the
clinician may note as many as are judged to be relevant. In general, the clinician should
note only those psychosocial and environmental problems that have been present during
the year preceding the current evaluation. However, the clinician may choose to note
psychosocial and environmental problems occurring prior to the previous year if these
clearly contribute to the mental disorder or have become a focus of treatment—for
example, previous combat experiences leading to Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
In practice, most psychosocial and environmental problems will be indicated on
Axis IV. However, when a psychosocial or environmental problem is the primary focus
of clinical attention, it should also be recorded on Axis I, with a code derived from the
section on Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention (see p. 675).
For convenience, the problems are grouped together in the following categories:
• Problems with primary support group—e.g., death of a family member;
health problems in family; disruption of family by separation, divorce, or
estrangement; removal from the home; remarriage of parent; sexual or physical
abuse; parental overprotection; neglect of child; inadequate discipline; discord
with siblings; birth of a sibling
• Problems related to the social environment—e.g., death or loss of friend;
inadequate social support; living alone; difficulty with acculturation; discrimina
tion; adjustment to life-cycle transition (such as retirement)
• Educational problems—e.g., illiteracy; academic problems; discord with teach-
ers or classmates; inadequate school environment
• Occupational problems—e.g., unemployment; threat of job loss; stressful work
schedule; difficult work conditions; job dissatisfaction; job change; discord with
boss or co-workers
• Housing problems—e.g., homelessness; inadequate housing; unsafe neighbor-
hood; discord with neighbors or landlord
• Economic problems—e.g., extreme poverty; inadequate finances; insufficient
welfare support
• Problems with access to health care services—e.g., inadequate health care
services; transportation to health care facilities unavailable; inadequate health
insurance
• Problems related to interaction with the legal system/crime—e.g., arrest;
incarceration; litigation; victim of crime30
Multiaxial Assessment
Other psychosocial and environmental problems—e.g., exposure to disas-
ters, war, other hostilities; discord with nonfamily caregivers such as counselor,
social worker, or physician; unavailability of social service agencies
When using the Multiaxial Evaluation Report Form (see p. 34), the clinician should
identify the relevant categories of psychosocial and environmental problems and indicate
the specific factors involved. If a recording form with a checklist of problem categories
is not used, the clinician may simply list the specific problems on Axis IV. (See examples
on p. 33.)
• Axis IV •
Psychosocial and Environmental Problems
Problems with primary support group
Problems related to the social environment
Educational problems
Occupational problems
Housing problems
Economic problems
Problems with access to health care services
Problems related to interaction with the legal system/crime
Other psychosocial and environmental problems
Axis V: Global Assessment of Functioning
Axis V is for reporting the clinician's judgment of the individual's overall level of
functioning. This information is useful in planning treatment and measuring its impact,
and in predicting outcome.
The reporting of overall functioning on Axis V can be done using the Global
Assessment of Functioning (GAP) Scale. The GAF Scale may be particularly useful in
tracking the clinical progress of individuals in global terms, using a single measure. The
GAF Scale is to be rated with respect only to psychological, social, and occupational
functioning. The instructions specify, "Do not include impairment in functioning due to
physical (or environmental) limitations." In most instances, ratings on the GAF Scale
should be for the current period (i.e., the level of functioning at the time of the evaluation)
because ratings of current functioning will generally reflect the need for treatment or
care. In some settings, it may be useful to note the GAF Scale rating both at time of
admission and at time of discharge. The GAF Scale may also be rated for other time
periods (e.g., the highest level of functioning for at least a few months during the past
year). The GAF Scale is reported on Axis V as follows: "GAF = ," followed by the GAF
rating from 1 to 100, followed by the time period reflected in the rating in parentheses—
for example, "(current)," "(highest level in past year)," "(at discharge)." See example
on p. 33.
In some settings, it may be useful to assess social and occupational disability andMultiaxial Assessment
31
to track progress in rehabilitation independent of the severity of the psychological
symptoms. For this purpose, a proposed Social and Occupational Functioning Assess-
ment Scale (SOFAS) (see p. 760) is included in Appendix B. Two additional proposed
scales—Global Assessment of Relational Functioning (GARF) Scale (see p. 758) and
Defensive Functioning Scale (see p. 751)—that may be useful in some settings are also
included in Appendix B.32
Multiaxial Assessment
Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) Scale
Consider psychological, social, and occupational functioning on a hypothetical continuum
of mental health-illness. Do not include impairment in functioning due to physical (or
environmental) limitations.
Code
100
91
(Note: Use intermediate codes when appropriate, e.g., 45, 68, 72.)
Superior functioning in a wide range of activities, life's problems never seem to get out
of hand, is sought out by others because of his or her many positive qualities. No
symptoms.
90 Absent or minimal symptoms (e.g., mild anxiety before an exam), good functioning in all areas,
interested and involved in a wide range of activities, socially effective, generally satisfied
with life, no more than everyday problems or concerns (e.g., an occasional argument with
81 family members).
80
71
70
6l
60
51
50
41
40
31
30
21
20
If symptoms are present, they are transient and expectable reactions to psychosocial
stressors (e.g., difficulty concentrating after family argument); no more than slight impairment
in social, occupational, or school functioning (e.g., temporarily falling behind in schoolwork).
Some mild symptoms (e.g., depressed mood and mild insomnia) OR some difficulty in social,
occupational, or school functioning (e.g., occasional truancy, or theft within the household), but
generally functioning pretty well, has some meaningful interpersonal relationships.
Moderate symptoms (e.g., flat affect and circumstantial speech, occasional panic attacks) OR
moderate difficulty in social, occupational, or school functioning (e.g., few friends, conflicts
with peers or co-workers).
Serious symptoms (e.g., suicidal ideation, severe obsessional rituals, frequent shoplifting) OR any
serious impairment in social, occupational, or school functioning (e.g., no friends, unable to
keep a job).
Some impairment in reality testing or communication (e.g., speech is at times illogical, obscure,
or irrelevant) OR major impairment in several areas, such as work or school, family relations,
judgment, thinking, or mood (e.g., depressed man avoids friends, neglects family, and is unable
to work; child frequently beats up younger children, is defiant at home, and is failing at school).
Behavior is considerably influenced by delusions or hallucinations OR serious impairment
in communication or judgment (e.g., sometimes incoherent, acts grossly inappropriately, suicidal
preoccupation) OR inability to function in almost all areas (e.g., stays in bed all day; no job,
home, or friends).
11 Some danger of hurting self or others (e.g., suicide attempts without clear expectation of death;
frequently violent; manic excitement) OR occasionally fails to maintain minimal personal
hygiene (e.g., smears feces) OR gross impairment in communication (e.g., largely incoherent
or mute).
10
|
1 Persistent danger of severely hurting self or others (e.g., recurrent violence) OR persistent
inability to maintain minimal personal hygiene OR serious suicidal act with clear expecta-
tion of death.
0
Inadequate information.
The rating of overall psychological functioning on a scale of 0-100 was operationalized by Luborsky in the
Health-Sickness Rating Scale (Luborsky L: "Clinicians'Judgments of Mental Health." Archives of General
Psychiatry 7:407-417, 1962). Spitzer and colleagues developed a revision of the Health-Sickness Rating
Scale called the Global Assessment Scale (GAS) (Endicott J, Spitzer RL, Fleiss JL, Cohen J: "The Global
Assessment Scale: A Procedure for Measuring Overall Severity of Psychiatric Disturbance." Archives of
General Psychiatry 33:766-771, 1976). A modified version of the GAS was included in DSM-III-R as the
Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) Scale.Multiaxial Assessment
33
Examples of How to Record
Results of a DSM-1V Multiaxial Evaluation
Example 1:
Axis I
296.23
Axis II
Axis III
Axis IV
Axis V
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Severe Without
Psychotic Features
305.00 Alcohol Abuse
301.6
Dependent Personality Disorder
Frequent use of denial
None
Threat of job loss
GAP = 35 (current)
Example 2:
Axis I
300.4
Dysthymic Disorder
315.00 Reading Disorder
Axis II V71.09 No diagnosis
Axis III 382.9
Otitis media, recurrent
Axis IV
Victim of child neglect
Axis V GAF = 53 (current)
Example
Axis I
Axis II
Axis III
Axis IV
Axis V
Example
Axis I
Axis II
Axis III
Axis IV
Axis V
3:
293.83
V71.09
244.9
365.23
Mood Disorder Due to Hypothyroidism, With Depressive Features
No diagnosis, histrionic personality features
Hypothyroidism
Chronic angle-closure glaucoma
None
GAF = 45 (on admission)
GAF = 65 (at discharge)
4:
V61.1
V71.09
Partner Relational Problem
No diagnosis
None
Unemployment
GAF = 83 (highest level past year)34
Multiaxial Assessment
Multiaxial Evaluation Report Form
The following form is offered as one possibility for reporting multiaxial evaluations. In
some settings, this form may be used exactly as is; in other settings, the form may be
adapted to satisfy special needs.
AXIS I: Clinical Disorders
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Diagnostic code
DSM-IV name
AXIS II: Personality Disorders
Mental Retardation
Diagnostic code
DSM-IV name
AXIS III: General Medical Conditions
ICD-9-CM code
ICD-9-CM name
AXIS IV: Psychosocial and Environmental Problems
Check:
D Problems with primary support group Specify:
D Problems related to the social environment Specify:
D Educational problems Specify:
D Occupational problems Specify:
D Housing problems Specify:
D Economic problems Specify:
D Problems with access to health care services Specify:
D Problems related to interaction with the legal system/crime Specify:
D Other psychosocial and environmental problems Specify:
AXIS V: Global Assessment of Functioning Scale
Score:
Time frame:Multiaxial Assessment
35
Nonaxial Format
Clinicians who do not wish to use the multi-axial format may simply list the appropriate
diagnoses. Those choosing this option should follow the general rule of recording as
many coexisting mental disorders, general medical conditions, and other factors as are
relevant to the care and treatment of the individual. The Principal Diagnosis or the
Reason for Visit should be listed first.
The examples below illustrate the reporting of diagnoses in a format that does not
use the multiaxial system.
Example 1:
296.23 Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Severe Without Psychotic
Features
305.00 Alcohol Abuse
301.6
Dependent Personality Disorder
Frequent use of denial
Example
300.4
315.00
382.9 2:
Dysthymic Disorder
Reading Disorder
Otitis media, recurrent
Example
293.83
244.9
365.23 3:
Mood Disorder Due to Hypothyroidism, With Depressive Features
Hypothyroidism
Chronic angle-closure glaucoma
Histrionic personality features
Example 4:
V61.1
Partner Relational ProblemThis page intentionally left blankDisorders Usually First
Diagnosed in Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence
T
The provision of a separate section for disorders that are usually first diagnosed in
infancy, childhood, or adolescence is for convenience only and is not meant to
suggest that there is any clear distinction between "childhood" and "adult" disorders.
Although most individuals with these disorders present for clinical attention during
childhood or adolescence, the disorders sometimes are not diagnosed until adulthood.
Moreover, many disorders included in other sections of the manual often have an onset
during childhood or adolescence. In evaluating an infant, child, or adolescent, the
clinician should consider the diagnoses included in this section but also should refer to
the disorders described elsewhere in this manual. Adults may also be diagnosed with
disorders included in this section for Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence if their clinical presentation meets relevant diagnostic criteria
(e.g., Stuttering, Pica). Moreover, if an adult had symptoms as a child that met full criteria
for a disorder, but now presents with an attenuated or residual form, the In Partial
Remission specifier may be indicated (e.g., Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,
Combined Type, In Partial Remission). For most (but not all) DSM-IV disorders, a single
criteria set is provided that applies to children, adolescents, and adults (e.g., if a child
or adolescent has symptoms that meet the criteria for Major Depressive Disorder, this
diagnosis should be given, regardless of the individual's age). The variations in the
presentation of a disorder that are attributable to an individual's developmental stage
are described in a section in the text titled "Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features."
Specific issues related to the diagnosis of Personality Disorders in children or adolescents
are discussed on p. 631.
The following disorders are included in this section:
Mental Retardation. This disorder is characterized by significantly subaverage intel-
lectual functioning (an IQ of approximately 70 or below) with onset before age 18 years
and concurrent deficits or impairments in adaptive functioning. Separate codes are
provided for Mild, Moderate, Severe, and Profound Mental Retardation and for
Mental Retardation, Severity Unspecified.
3738
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Learning Disorders. These disorders are characterized by academic functioning that
is substantially below that expected given the person's chronological age, measured
intelligence, and age-appropriate education. The specific disorders included in this
section are Reading Disorder, Mathematics Disorder, Disorder of Written Expres-
sion, and Learning Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Motor Skills Disorder. This includes Developmental Coordination Disorder,
which is characterized by motor coordination that is substantially below that expected
given the person's chronological age and measured intelligence.
Communication Disorders. These disorders are characterized by difficulties in
speech or language and include Expressive Language Disorder, Mixed Receptive-
Expressive Language Disorder, Phonological Disorder, Stuttering, and Commu
nication Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Pervasive Developmental Disorders. These disorders are characterized by severe
deficits and pervasive impairment in multiple areas of development. These include
impairment in reciprocal social interaction, impairment in communication, and the
presence of stereotyped behavior, interests, and activities. The specific disorders
included in this section are Autistic Disorder, Rett's Disorder, Childhood Disinte-
grative Disorder, Asperger's Disorder, and Pervasive Developmental Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified.
Attention-Deficit and Disruptive Behavior Disorders. This section includes At-
tention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, which is characterized by prominent symp-
toms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity. Subtypes are provided for
specifying the predominant symptom presentation: Predominantly Inattentive Type,
Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive Type, and Combined Type. Also included
in this section are the Disruptive Behavior Disorders: Conduct Disorder is characterized
by a pattern of behavior that violates the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate
societal norms or rules; Oppositional Defiant Disorder is characterized by a pattern
of negativistic, hostile, and defiant behavior. This section also includes two Not
Otherwise Specified categories: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Not Oth-
erwise Specified and Disruptive Behavior Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Feeding and Eating Disorders of Infancy or Early Childhood. These disorders
are characterized by persistent disturbances in feeding and eating. The specific disorders
included are Pica, Rumination Disorder, and Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early
Childhood. Note that Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa are included in the "Eating
Disorders" section presented later in the manual (see p. 539).
Tic Disorders. These disorders are characterized by vocal and/or motor tics. The
specific disorders included are Tourette's Disorder, Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic
Disorder, Transient Tic Disorder, and Tic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Elimination Disorders. This grouping includes Encopresis, the repeated passage
of feces into inappropriate places, and Enuresis, the repeated voiding of urine into
inappropriate places.Mental Retardation
39
Other Disorders of Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence. This grouping is for
disorders that are not covered in the sections listed above. Separation Anxiety
Disorder is characterized by developmentally inappropriate and excessive anxiety
concerning separation from home or from those to whom the child is attached. Selective
Mutism is characterized by a consistent failure to speak in specific social situations
despite speaking in other situations. Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy or
Early Childhood is characterized by markedly disturbed and developmentally inap-
propriate social relatedness that occurs in most contexts and is associated with grossly
pathogenic care. Stereotypic Movement Disorder is characterized by repetitive,
seemingly driven, and nonfunctional motor behavior that markedly interferes with
normal activities and at times may result in bodily injury. Disorder of Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence Not Otherwise Specified is a residual category for coding
disorders with onset in infancy, childhood, or adolescence that do not meet criteria for
any specific disorder in the Classification.
Children or adolescents may present with problems requiring clinical attention that
are not defined as mental disorders (e.g., Relational Problems, Problems Related to Abuse
or Neglect, Bereavement, Borderline Intellectual Functioning, Academic Problem, Child
or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior, Identity Problem). These are listed at the end of the
manual in the section "Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention"
(see p. 675).
DSM-III-R included two anxiety disorders specific to children and adolescents,
Overanxious Disorder of Childhood and Avoidant Disorder of Childhood, that have been
subsumed under Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Social Phobia, respectively, because
of similarities in essential features.
Mental Retardation
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Mental Retardation is significantly subaverage general intellectual
functioning (Criterion A) that is accompanied by significant limitations in adaptive
functioning in at least two of the following skill areas: communication, self-care, home
living, social/interpersonal skills, use of community resources, self-direction, functional
academic skills, work, leisure, health, and safety (Criterion B). The onset must occur
before age 18 years (Criterion C). Mental Retardation has many different etiologies and
may be seen as a final common pathway of various pathological processes that affect
the functioning of the central nervous system.
General intellectual functioning is defined by the intelligence quotient (IQ or
IQ-equivalent) obtained by assessment with one or more of the standardized, individ-
ually administered intelligence tests (e.g., Wechsler Intelligence Scales for Children—
Revised, Stanford-Binet, Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children). Significantly
subaverage intellectual functioning is defined as an IQ of about 70 or below (approxi-
mately 2 standard deviations below the mean). It should be noted that there is a
measurement error of approximately 5 points in assessing IQ, although this may vary
from instrument to instrument (e.g., a Wechsler IQ of 70 is considered to represent a
range of 65-75). Thus, it is possible to diagnose Mental Retardation in individuals with40
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
IQs between 70 and 75 who exhibit significant deficits in adaptive behavior. Conversely,
Mental Retardation would not be diagnosed in an individual with an IQ lower than 70
if there are no significant deficits or impairments in adaptive functioning. The choice of
testing instruments and interpretation of results should take into account factors that
may limit test performance (e.g., the individual's sociocultural background, native
language, and associated communicative, motor, and sensory handicaps). When there
is significant scatter in the subtest scores, the profile of strengths and weaknesses, rather
than the mathematically derived full-scale IQ, will more accurately reflect the person's
learning abilities. When there is a marked discrepancy across verbal and performance
scores, averaging to obtain a full-scale IQ score can be misleading.
Impairments in adaptive functioning, rather than a low IQ, are usually the presenting
symptoms in individuals with Mental Retardation. Adaptive functioning refers to how
effectively individuals cope with common life demands and how well they meet the
standards of personal independence expected of someone in their particular age group,
sociocultural background, and community setting. Adaptive functioning may be influ-
enced by various factors, including education, motivation, personality characteristics,
social and vocational opportunities, and the mental disorders and general medical
conditions that may coexist with Mental Retardation. Problems in adaptation are more
likely to improve with remedial efforts than is the cognitive IQ, which tends to remain
a more stable attribute.
It is useful to gather evidence for deficits in adaptive functioning from one or more
reliable independent sources (e.g., teacher evaluation and educational, developmental,
and medical history). Several scales have also been designed to measure adaptive
functioning or behavior (e.g., the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales and the American
Association on Mental Retardation Adaptive Behavior Scale). These scales generally
provide a clinical cutoff score that is a composite of performance in a number of adaptive
skill domains. It should be noted that scores for certain individual domains are not
included in some of these instruments and that individual domain scores may vary
considerably in reliability. As in the assessment of intellectual functioning, consideration
should be given to the suitability of the instrument to the person's sociocultural
background, education, associated handicaps, motivation, and cooperation. For instance,
the presence of significant handicaps invalidates many adaptive scale norms. In addition,
behaviors that would normally be considered maladaptive (e.g., dependency, passivity)
may be evidence of good adaptation in the context of a particular individual's life (e.g.,
in some institutional settings).
Degrees of Severity of Mental Retardation
Four degrees of severity can be specified, reflecting the level of intellectual impairment:
Mild, Moderate, Severe, and Profound.
317
Mild Mental Retardation:
IQ level 50-55 to approximately 70
318.0 Moderate Retardation:
IQ level 35-40 to 50-55
318.1 Severe Mental Retardation:
IQ level 20-25 to 35-40
318.2 Profound Mental Retardation: IQ level below 20 or 25
319 Mental Retardation, Severity Unspecified, can be used when there is a
strong presumption of Mental Retardation but the person's intelligence is untestable by
standard tests (e.g., with individuals too impaired or uncooperative, or with infants).Mental Retardation
41
317 Mild Mental Retardation
Mild Mental Retardation is roughly equivalent to what used to be referred to as the
educational category of "educable." This group constitutes the largest segment (about
85%) of those with the disorder. As a group, people with this level of Mental Retardation
typically develop social and communication skills during the preschool years (ages
0-5 years), have minimal impairment in sensorimotor areas, and often are not distin-
guishable from children without Mental Retardation until a later age. By their late teens,
they can acquire academic skills up to approximately the sixth-grade level. During their
adult years, they usually achieve social and vocational skills adequate for minimum
self-support, but may need supervision, guidance, and assistance, especially when under
unusual social or economic stress. With appropriate supports, individuals with Mild
Mental Retardation can usually live successfully in the community, either independently
or in supervised settings.
318.0 Moderate Mental Retardation
Moderate Mental Retardation is roughly equivalent to what used to be referred to as the
educational category of "trainable." This outdated term should not be used because it
wrongly implies that people with Moderate Mental Retardation cannot benefit from
educational programs. This group constitutes about 10% of the entire population of
people with Mental Retardation. Most of the individuals with this level of Mental
Retardation acquire communication skills during early childhood years. They profit from
vocational training and, with moderate supervision, can attend to their personal care.
They can also benefit from training in social and occupational skills but are unlikely to
progress beyond the second-grade level in academic subjects. They may learn to travel
independently in familiar places. During adolescence, their difficulties in recognizing
social conventions may interfere with peer relationships. In their adult years, the majority
are able to perform unskilled or semiskilled work under supervision in sheltered
workshops or in the general work force. They adapt well to life in the community,
usually in supervised settings.
318.1 Severe Mental Retardation
The group with Severe Mental Retardation constitutes 3%—4% of individuals with Mental
Retardation. During the early childhood years, they acquire little or no communicative
speech. During the school-age period, they may learn to talk and can be trained in
elementary self-care skills. They profit to only a limited extent from instruction in
pre-academic subjects, such as familiarity with the alphabet and simple counting, but
can master skills such as learning sight reading of some "survival" words. In their adult
years, they may be able to perform simple tasks in closely supervised settings. Most
adapt well to life in the community, in group homes or with their families, unless they
have an associated handicap that requires specialized nursing or other care.
318.2 Profound Mental Retardation
The group with Profound Mental Retardation constitutes approximately l%-2% of people
with Mental Retardation. Most individuals with this diagnosis have an identified42
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
neurological condition that accounts for their Mental Retardation. During the early
childhood years, they display considerable impairments in sensorimotor functioning.
Optimal development may occur in a highly structured environment with constant aid
and supervision and an individualized relationship with a caregiver. Motor development
and self-care and communication skills may improve if appropriate training is provided.
Some can perform simple tasks in closely supervised and sheltered settings.
319 Mental Retardation, Severity Unspecified
The diagnosis of Mental Retardation, Severity Unspecified, should be used when there
is a strong presumption of Mental Retardation but the person cannot be successfully
tested by standard intelligence tests. This may be the case when children, adolescents,
or adults are too impaired or uncooperative to be tested or, with infants, when there is
a clinical judgment of significantly subaverage intellectual functioning, but the available
tests (e.g., the Bayley Scales of Infant Development, Cattell Infant Intelligence Scales,
and others) do not yield IQ values. In general, the younger the age, the more difficult
it is to assess for the presence of Mental Retardation except in those with profound
impairment.
Recording Procedures
The specific diagnostic code for Mental Retardation is selected based on the level of
severity as indicated above and is coded on Axis II. If Mental Retardation is associated
with another mental disorder (e.g., Autistic Disorder), the additional mental disorder is
coded on Axis I. If Mental Retardation is associated with a general medical condition
(e.g., Down's syndrome), the general medical condition is coded on Axis III.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. No specific personality
and behavioral features are uniquely associated with Mental Retardation. Some individ-
uals with Mental Retardation are passive, placid, and dependent, whereas others can be
aggressive and impulsive. Lack of communication skills may predispose to disruptive
and aggressive behaviors that substitute for communicative language. Some general
medical conditions associated with Mental Retardation are characterized by certain
behavioral symptoms (e.g., the intractable self-injurious behavior associated with
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome). Individuals with Mental Retardation may be vulnerable to
exploitation by others (e.g., being physically and sexually abused) or being denied rights
and opportunities.
Individuals with Mental Retardation have a prevalence of comorbid mental disorders
that is estimated to be three to four times greater than in the general population. In some
cases, this may result from a shared etiology that is common to Mental Retardation and
the associated mental disorder (e.g., head trauma may result in Mental Retardation and
in Personality Change Due to Head Trauma). All types of mental disorders may be seen,
and there is no evidence that the nature of a given mental disorder is different in
individuals who have Mental Retardation. The diagnosis of comorbid mental disorders
is, however, often complicated by the fact that the clinical presentation may be modifiedMental Retardation
43
by the severity of the Mental Retardation and associated handicaps. Deficits in commu-
nication skills may result in an inability to provide an adequate history (e.g., the diagnosis
of Major Depressive Disorder in a nonverbal adult with Mental Retardation is often based
primarily on manifestations such as depressed mood, irritability, anorexia, or insomnia
that are observed by others). More often than is the case in individuals without Mental
Retardation, it may be difficult to choose a specific diagnosis and in such cases the
appropriate Not Otherwise Specified category can be used (e.g., Depressive Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified). The most common associated mental disorders are Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Mood Disorders, Pervasive Developmental Disorders,
Stereotypic Movement Disorder, and Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical
Condition (e.g., Dementia Due to Head Trauma). Individuals who have Mental Retar-
dation due to Down's syndrome may be at higher risk for developing Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type. Pathological changes in the brain associated with this disorder usually
develop by the time these individuals are in their early 40s, although the clinical
symptoms of dementia are not evident until later.
Predisposing factors. Etiological factors may be primarily biological or primarily
psychosocial, or some combination of both. In approximately 30%-40% of individuals
seen in clinical settings, no clear etiology for the Mental Retardation can be determined
despite extensive evaluation efforts. The major predisposing factors include:
Heredity (approximately 5%): These factors include inborn errors of metabolism
inherited mostly through autosomal recessive mechanisms (e.g., Tay-Sachs disease),
other single-gene abnormalities with Mendelian inheritance and variable expression
(e.g., tuberous sclerosis), and chromosomal aberrations (e.g., translocation Down's
syndrome, fragile X syndrome).
Early alterations of embryonic development (approximately 30%): These factors
include chromosomal changes (e.g., Down's syndrome due to trisomy 21) or prenatal
damage due to toxins (e.g., maternal alcohol consumption, infections).
Pregnancy and perinatal problems (approximately 10%): These factors include fetal
malnutrition, prematurity, hypoxia, viral and other infections, and trauma.
General medical conditions acquired in infancy or childhood (approximately 5%);
These factors include infections, traumas, and poisoning (e.g., due to lead).
Environmental influences and other mental disorders (approximately 15%-20%):
These factors include deprivation of nurturance and of social, linguistic, and other
stimulation, and severe mental disorders (e.g., Autistic Disorder).
Associated laboratory findings. Other than the results of psychological and adap-
tive behavior tests that are necessary for the diagnosis of Mental Retardation, there are
no laboratory findings that are uniquely associated with Mental Retardation. Diagnostic
laboratory findings may be associated with a specific accompanying general medical
condition (e.g., chromosomal findings in various genetic conditions, high blood phenyl-
alanine in phenylketonuria, or abnormalities on central nervous system imaging).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
There are no specific physical features associated with Mental Retardation. When Mental
Retardation is part of a specific syndrome, the clinical features of that syndrome will be
present (e.g., the physical features of Down's syndrome). The more severe the Mental
Retardation (especially if it is severe or profound), the greater the likelihood of neurological
(e.g., seizures), neuromuscular, visual, auditory, cardiovascular, and other conditions.44
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Care should be taken to ensure that intellectual testing procedures reflect adequate
attention to the individual's ethnic or cultural background. This is usually accomplished
by using tests in which the individual's relevant characteristics are represented in the
standardization sample of the test or by employing an examiner who is familiar with
aspects of the individual's ethnic or cultural background. Individualized testing is always
required to make the diagnosis of Mental Retardation. The prevalence of Mental
Retardation due to known biological factors is similar among children of upper and
lower socioeconomic classes, except that certain etiological factors are linked to lower
socioeconomic status (e.g., lead poisoning and premature births). In cases in which no
specific biological causation can be identified, lower socioeconomic classes are over-
represented and the Mental Retardation is usually milder, although all degrees of severity
are represented. Developmental considerations should be taken into account in evalu-
ating impairment in adaptive skills because certain of the skill areas are less relevant at
different ages (e.g., use of community resources or employment in school-age children).
Mental Retardation is more common among males, with a male-to-female ratio of
approximately 1.5:1.
Prevalence
The prevalence rate of Mental Retardation has been estimated at approximately 1%.
However, different studies have reported different rates depending on definitions used,
methods of ascertainment, and population studied.
Course
The diagnosis of Mental Retardation requires that the onset of the disorder be before
age 18 years. The age and mode of onset depend on the etiology and severity of the
Mental Retardation. More severe retardation, especially when associated with a syndrom
with a characteristic phenotype, tends to be recognized early (e.g., Down's syndrome
is usually diagnosed at birth). In contrast, Mild Retardation of unknown origin is generally
noticed later. In more severe retardation resulting from an acquired cause, the intellectual
impairment will develop more abruptly (e.g., retardation following an encephalitis). The
course of Mental Retardation is influenced by the course of underlying general medical
conditions and by environmental factors (e.g., educational and other opportunities,
environmental stimulation, and appropriateness of management). If an underlying
general medical condition is static, the course is more likely to be variable and to depend
on environmental factors. Mental Retardation is not necessarily a lifelong disorder.
Individuals who had Mild Mental Retardation earlier in their lives manifested by failure
in academic learning tasks may, with appropriate training and opportunities, develop
good adaptive skills in other domains and may no longer have the level of impairment
required for a diagnosis of Mental Retardation.
Familial Pattern
Because of its heterogeneous etiology, no familial pattern is applicable to Mental
Retardation as a general category. The heritability of Mental Retardation is discussed
under "Predisposing Factors" (see p. 43).Mental Retardation
45
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnostic criteria for Mental Retardation do not include an exclusion criterion;
therefore, the diagnosis should be made whenever the diagnostic criteria are met,
regardless of and in addition to the presence of another disorder. In Learning Disorders
or Communication Disorders (unassociated with Mental Retardation), the develop-
ment in a specific area (e.g., reading, expressive language) is impaired but there is no
generalized impairment in intellectual development and adaptive functioning. A Learn-
ing Disorder or Communication Disorder can be diagnosed in an individual with Mental
Retardation if the specific deficit is out of proportion to the severity of the Mental
Retardation. In Pervasive Developmental Disorders, there is qualitative impairment
in the development of reciprocal social interaction and in the development of verbal
and nonverbal social communication skills. Mental Retardation often accompanies
Pervasive Developmental Disorders (75%-80% of individuals with a Pervasive Develop-
mental Disorder also have Mental Retardation).
Some cases of Mental Retardation have their onset after a period of normal
functioning and may qualify for the additional diagnosis of dementia. A diagnosis of
dementia requires that the memory impairment and other cognitive deficits represent a
significant decline from a previously higher level of functioning. Because it may be
difficult to determine the previous level of functioning in very young children, the
diagnosis of dementia may not be appropriate until the child is between ages 4 and
6 years. In general, for individuals under age 18 years, the diagnosis of dementia is made
only when the condition is not characterized satisfactorily by the diagnosis of Mental
Retardation alone.
Borderline Intellectual Functioning (see p. 684) describes an IQ range that is
higher than that for Mental Retardation (generally 71-84). As discussed earlier, an IQ score
may involve a measurement error of approximately 5 points, depending on the testing
instrument. Thus, it is possible to diagnose Mental Retardation in individuals with IQ
scores between 71 and 75 if they have significant deficits in adaptive behavior that meet
the criteria for Mental Retardation. Differentiating Mild Mental Retardation from Borderline
Intellectual Functioning requires careful consideration of all available information.
Relationship to Other Classifications of
Mental Retardation
The classification system of the American Association on Mental Retardation (AAMR)
includes the same three criteria (i.e., significantly subaverage intellectual functioning,
limitations in adaptive skills, and onset prior to age 18 years). In the AAMR classification,
the criterion of significantly subaverage intellectual functioning refers to a standard score
of approximately 70—75 or below (which takes into account the potential measurement
error of plus or minus 5 points in IQ testing). Furthermore, DSM-IV specifies levels of
severity, whereas the AAMR 1992 classification system specifies "Patterns and Intensity
of Supports Needed" (i.e., "Intermittent, Limited, Extensive, and Pervasive"), which are
not directly comparable with the degrees of severity in DSM-IV. The definition of
developmental disabilities in Public Law 95-602 (1978) is not limited to Mental
Retardation and is based on functional criteria. This law defines developmental disability
as a disability attributable to a mental or physical impairment, manifested before age
22 years, likely to continue indefinitely, resulting in substantial limitation in three or
more specified areas of functioning, and requiring specific and lifelong or extended care.46
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
I Diagnostic criteria for Mental Retardation
A. Significantly subaverage intellectual functioning: an IQ of approximately
70 or below on an individually administered IQ test (for infants, a clinical
judgment of significantly subaverage intellectual functioning).
B. Concurrent deficits or impairments in present adaptive functioning (i.e.,
the person's effectiveness in meeting the standards expected for his or
her age by his or her cultural group) in at least two of the following
areas: communication, self-care, home living, social/interpersonal skills,
use of community resources, self-direction, functional academic skills,
work, leisure, health, and safety.
C. The onset is before age 18 years.
Code based on degree of severity reflecting level of intellectual impairment:
317 Mild Mental Retardation:
IQ level 50-55 to approximately 70
318.0 Moderate Mental Retardation: IQ level 35^0 to 50-55
318.1 Severe Mental Retardation:
IQ level 20-25 to 35-40
318.2 Profound Mental Retardation: IQ level below 20 or 25
319 Mental Retardation, Severity Unspecified: when there is strong
presumption of Mental Retardation but the person's intelligence is
untestable by standard tests
Learning Disorders
(formerly Academic Skills Disorders)
The section on Learning Disorders includes Reading Disorder, Mathematics Disorder,
Disorder of Written Expression, and Learning Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Diagnostic Features
Learning Disorders are diagnosed when the individual's achievement on individually
administered, standardized tests in reading, mathematics, or written expression is
substantially below that expected for age, schooling, and level of intelligence. The
learning problems significantly interfere with academic achievement or activities of daily
living that require reading, mathematical, or writing skills. A variety of statistical
approaches can be used to establish that a discrepancy is significant. Substantially below
is usually defined as a discrepancy of more than 2 standard deviations between
achievement and IQ. A smaller discrepancy between achievement and IQ (i.e., between
1 and 2 standard deviations) is sometimes used, especially in cases where an individual's
performance on an IQ test may have been compromised by an associated disorder in
cognitive processing, a comorbid mental disorder or general medical condition, or the
individual's ethnic or cultural background. If a sensory deficit is present, the learningLearning Disorders
47
difficulties must be in excess of those usually associated with the deficit. Learning
Disorders may persist into adulthood.
Associated Features and Disorders
Demoralization, low self-esteem, and deficits in social skills may be associated with
Learning Disorders. The school drop-out rate for children or adolescents with Learning
Disorders is reported at nearly 40% (or approximately 1.5 times the average). Adults
with Learning Disorders may have significant difficulties in employment or social
adjustment. Many individuals (10%-25%) with Conduct Disorder, Oppositional Defiant
Disorder, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, or Dys-
thymic Disorder also have Learning Disorders. There is evidence that developmental
delays in language may occur in association with Learning Disorders (particularly
Reading Disorder), although these delays may not be sufficiently severe to warrant the
separate diagnosis of a Communication Disorder. Learning Disorders may also be
associated with a higher rate of Developmental Coordination Disorder.
There may be underlying abnormalities in cognitive processing (e.g., deficits in
visual perception, linguistic processes, attention, or memory, or a combination of these)
that often precede or are associated with Learning Disorders. Standardized tests to
measure these processes are generally less reliable and valid than other psychoeduca-
tional tests. Although genetic predisposition, perinatal injury, and various neurological
or other general medical conditions may be associated with the development of Learning
Disorders, the presence of such conditions does not invariably predict an eventual
Learning Disorder, and there are many individuals with Learning Disorders who have
no such history. Learning Disorders are, however, frequently found in association with
a variety of general medical conditions (e.g., lead poisoning, fetal alcohol syndrome, or
fragile X syndrome).
Specific Culture Features
Care should be taken to ensure that intelligence testing procedures reflect adequate
attention to the individual's ethnic or cultural background. This is usually accomplished
by using tests in which the individual's relevant characteristics are represented in the
standardization sample of the test or by employing an examiner who is familiar with
aspects of the individual's ethnic or cultural background. Individualized testing is always
required to make the diagnosis of a Learning Disorder.
Prevalence
Estimates of the prevalence of Learning Disorders range from 2% to 10% depending on
the nature of ascertainment and the definitions applied. Approximately 5% of students
in public schools in the United States are identified as having a Learning Disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Learning Disorders must be differentiated from normal variations in academic
attainment and from scholastic difficulties due to lack of opportunity, poor teaching,
or cultural factors. Inadequate schooling can result in poor performance on standard-48
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
ized achievement tests. Children from ethnic or cultural backgrounds different from the
prevailing school culture or in which English is not the primary language and children
who have attended class in schools where teaching has been inadequate may score
poorly on achievement tests. Children from these same backgrounds may also be at
greater risk for absenteeism due to more frequent illnesses or impoverished or chaotic
living environments.
Impaired vision or hearing may affect learning ability and should be investigated
through audiometric or visual screening tests. A Learning Disorder may be diagnosed in
the presence of such sensory deficits only if the learning difficulties are in excess of
those usually associated with these deficits. Accompanying neurological or other general
medical conditions should be coded on Axis III.
In Mental Retardation, learning difficulties are commensurate with general impair-
ment in intellectual functioning. However, in some cases of Mild Mental Retardation, the
level of achievement in reading, mathematics, or written expression is significantly below
expected levels given the person's schooling and severity of Mental Retardation. In such
cases, the additional diagnosis of the appropriate Learning Disorder should be made.
An additional Learning Disorder diagnosis should be made in the context of a
Pervasive Developmental Disorder only when academic impairment is significantly
below expected levels given the individual's intellectual functioning and schooling. In
individuals with Communication Disorders, intellectual functioning may have to be
assessed using standardized measures of nonverbal intellectual capacity. In cases in
which academic achievement is significantly below this measured capacity, the appro-
priate Learning Disorder should be diagnosed.
Mathematics Disorder and Disorder of Written Expression most commonly
occur in combination with Reading Disorder. When criteria are met for more than one
Learning Disorder, all should be diagnosed.
315.00 Reading Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Reading Disorder is reading achievement (i.e., reading accuracy,
speed, or comprehension as measured by individually administered standardized tests)
that falls substantially below that expected given the individual's chronological age,
measured intelligence, and age-appropriate education (Criterion A). The disturbance in
reading significantly interferes with academic achievement or with activities of daily
living that require reading skills (Criterion B). If a sensory deficit is present, the reading
difficulties are in excess of those usually associated with it (Criterion C). If a neurological
or other general medical condition or sensory deficit is present, it should be coded on
Axis III. In individuals with Reading Disorder (which has also been called "dyslexia"),
oral reading is characterized by distortions, substitutions, or omissions; both oral and
silent reading are characterized by slowness and errors in comprehension.
Associated Features and Disorders
See the "Associated Features and Disorders" section for Learning Disorders (p. 47).
Mathematics Disorder and Disorder of Written Expression are commonly associated with315.00 Reading Disorder
49
Reading Disorder, and it is relatively rare for either of these disorders to be found in the
absence of Reading Disorder.
Specific Gender Features
From 60% to 80% of individuals diagnosed with Reading Disorder are males. Referral
procedures may often be biased toward identifying males, because they more frequently
display disruptive behaviors in association with Learning Disorders. The disorder has
been found to occur at more equal rates in males and females when careful diagnostic
ascertainment and stringent criteria are used rather than traditional school-based referral
and diagnostic procedures.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Reading Disorder is difficult to establish because many studies focus
on the prevalence of Learning Disorders without careful separation into specific disorders
of Reading, Mathematics, or Written Expression. Reading Disorder, alone or in combi-
nation with Mathematics Disorder or Disorder of Written Expression, accounts for
approximately four of every five cases of Learning Disorder. The prevalence of Reading
Disorder in the United States is estimated at 4% of school-age children. Lower incidence
and prevalence figures for Reading Disorder may be found in other countries in which
stricter criteria are used.
Course
Although symptoms of reading difficulty (e.g., inability to distinguish among common
letters or to associate common phonemes with letter symbols) may occur as early as
kindergarten, Reading Disorder is seldom diagnosed before the end of kindergarten or
the beginning of first grade because formal reading instruction usually does not begin
until this point in most school settings. Particularly when Reading Disorder is associated
with high IQ, the child may function at or near grade level in the early grades, and the
Reading Disorder may not be fully apparent until the fourth grade or later. With early
identification and intervention, the prognosis is good in a significant percentage of cases.
Reading Disorder may persist into adult life.
Familial Pattern
Reading Disorder aggregates familially and is more prevalent among first-degree
biological relatives of individuals with Learning Disorders.
Differential
Diagnosis
See the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Learning Disorders (p. 47).50
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Diagnostic criteria for 315.00 Reading Disorder
A. Reading achievement, as measured by individually administered stan-
dardized tests of reading accuracy or comprehension, is substantially
below that expected given the person's chronological age, measured
intelligence, and age-appropriate education.
B. The disturbance in Criterion A significantly interferes with academic
achievement or activities of daily living that require reading skills.
C. If a sensory deficit is present, the reading difficulties are in excess of
those usually associated with it.
Coding note: If a general medical (e.g., neurological) condition or sensory deficit
is present, code the condition on Axis III.
315.1 Mathematics Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Mathematics Disorder is mathematical ability (as measured by
individually administered standardized tests of mathematical calculation or reasoning)
that falls substantially below that expected for the individual's chronological age,
measured intelligence, and age-appropriate education (Criterion A). The disturbance in
mathematics significantly interferes with academic achievement or with activities of daily
living that require mathematical skills (Criterion B). If a sensory deficit is present, the
difficulties in mathematical ability are in excess of those usually associated with it
(Criterion C). If a neurological or other general medical condition or sensory deficit is
present, it should be coded on Axis III. A number of different skills may be impaired in
Mathematics Disorder, including "linguistic" skills (e.g., understanding or naming
mathematical terms, operations, or concepts, and decoding written problems into
mathematical symbols), "perceptual" skills (e.g., recognizing or reading numerical
symbols or arithmetic signs, and clustering objects into groups), "attention" skills (e.g.,
copying numbers or figures correctly, remembering to add in "carried" numbers, and
observing operational signs), and "mathematical" skills (e.g., following sequences of
mathematical steps, counting objects, and learning multiplication tables).
Associated Features and Disorders
See the "Associated Features and Disorders" section for Learning Disorders (p. 47).
Mathematics Disorder is commonly found in combination with Reading Disorder or
Disorder of Written Expression.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Mathematics Disorder is difficult to establish because many studies
focus on the prevalence of Learning Disorders without careful separation into specific315-2 Disorder of Written Expression
51
disorders of Reading, Mathematics, or Written Expression. The prevalence of Mathemat-
ics Disorder alone (i.e., when not found in association with other Learning Disorders)
has been estimated at approximately one in every five cases of Learning Disorder. It is
estimated that 1% of school-age children have Mathematics Disorder.
Course
Although symptoms of difficulty in mathematics (e.g., confusion in number concepts or
inability to count accurately) may appear as early as kindergarten or first grade,
Mathematics Disorder is seldom diagnosed before the end of first grade because
sufficient formal mathematics instruction has usually not occurred until this point in most
school settings. It usually becomes apparent during second or third grade. Particularly
when Mathematics Disorder is associated with high IQ, the child may be able to function
at or near grade level in the early grades, and Mathematics Disorder may not be apparent
until the fifth grade or later.
Differential
Diagnosis
See the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Learning Disorders (p. 47).
Diagnostic criteria for 315.1 Mathematics Disorder
A. Mathematical ability, as measured by individually administered stan-
dardized tests, is substantially below that expected given the person's
chronological age, measured intelligence, and age-appropriate edu-
cation.
B. The disturbance in Criterion A significantly interferes with academic
achievement or activities of daily living that require mathematical ability.
C. If a sensory deficit is present, the difficulties in mathematical ability are
in excess of those usually associated with it.
Coding note: If a general medical (e.g., neurological) condition or sensory deficit
is present, code the condition on Axis III.
315.2 Disorder of Written Expression
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Disorder of Written Expression is writing skills (as measured by
an individually administered standardized test or functional assessment of writing skills)
that fall substantially below those expected given the individual's chronological age,
measured intelligence, and age-appropriate education (Criterion A). The disturbance in
written expression significantly interferes with academic achievement or with activities52
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
of daily living that require writing skills (Criterion B). If a sensory deficit is present, the
difficulties in writing skills are in excess of those usually associated with it (Criterion C).
If a neurological or other general medical condition or sensory deficit is present, it should
be coded on Axis III. There is generally a combination of difficulties in the individual's
ability to compose written texts evidenced by grammatical or punctuation errors within
sentences, poor paragraph organization, multiple spelling errors, and excessively poor
handwriting. This diagnosis is generally not given if there are only spelling errors or
poor handwriting in the absence of other impairment in written expression. Compared
with other Learning Disorders, relatively less is known about Disorders of Written
Expression and their remediation, particularly when they occur in the absence of Reading
Disorder. Except for spelling, standardized tests in this area are less well developed than
tests of reading or mathematical ability, and the evaluation of impairment in written skills
may require a comparison between extensive samples of the individual's written
school work and expected performance for age and IQ. This is especially the case for
young children in the early elementary grades. Tasks in which the child is asked to copy,
write to dictation, and write spontaneously may all be necessary to establish the presence
and extent of this disorder.
Associated Features and Disorders
See the "Associated Features and Disorders" section for Learning Disorders (p. 47).
Disorder of Written Expression is commonly found in combination with Reading
Disorder or Mathematics Disorder. There is some evidence that language and percep-
tual-motor deficits may accompany this disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Disorder of Written Expression is difficult to establish because many
studies focus on the prevalence of Learning Disorders in general without careful
separation into specific disorders of reading, mathematics, or written expression.
Disorder of Written Expression is rare when not associated with other Learning Disorders.
Course
Although difficulty in writing (e.g., particularly poor handwriting or copying ability or
inability to remember letter sequences in common words) may appear as early as the
first grade, Disorder of Written Expression is seldom diagnosed before the end of first
grade because sufficient formal writing instruction has usually not occurred until this
point in most school settings. The disorder is usually apparent by second grade. Disorder
of Written Expression may occasionally be seen in older children or adults, and little is
known about its long-term prognosis.
Differential Diagnosis
See the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Learning Disorders (p. 47). A disorder in
spelling or handwriting alone, in the absence of other difficulties of written expression,
generally does not qualify for a diagnosis of Disorder of Written Expression. If poor
handwriting is due to impairment in motor coordination, a diagnosis of Developmental
Coordination Disorder should be considered.315.4 Developmental Coordination Disorder
53
Diagnostic criteria for 315.2 Disorder of Written
Expression
A. Writing skills, as measured by individually administered standardized
tests (or functional assessments of writing skills), are substantially below
those expected given the person's chronological age, measured intelli-
gence, and age-appropriate education.
B. The disturbance in Criterion A significantly interferes with academic
achievement or activities of daily living that require the composition of
written texts (e.g., writing grammatically correct sentences and organ-
ized paragraphs).
C. If a sensory deficit is present, the difficulties in writing skills are in excess
of those usually associated with it.
Coding note: If a general medical (e.g., neurological) condition or sensory deficit
is present, code the condition on Axis III.
315.9 Learning Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders in learning that do not meet criteria for any specific Learning
Disorder. This category might include problems in all three areas (reading, mathematics,
written expression) that together significantly interfere with academic achievement even
though performance on tests measuring each individual skill is not substantially below
that expected given the person's chronological age, measured intelligence, and age-
appropriate education.
Motor Skills Disorder
315.4 Developmental Coordination Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Developmental Coordination Disorder is a marked impairment
in the development of motor coordination (Criterion A). The diagnosis is made only if
this impairment significantly interferes with academic achievement or activities of daily
living (Criterion B). The diagnosis is made if the coordination difficulties are not due to
a general medical condition (e.g., cerebral palsy, hemiplegia, or muscular dystrophy)
and the criteria are not met for Pervasive Developmental Disorder (Criterion C). If Mental
Retardation is present, the motor difficulties are in excess of those usually associated
with it (Criterion D). The manifestations of this disorder vary with age and development.
For example, younger children may display clumsiness and delays in achieving
developmental motor milestones (e.g., walking, crawling, sitting, tying shoelaces,54
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
buttoning shirts, zipping pants). Older children may display difficulties with the motor
aspects of assembling puzzles, building models, playing ball, and printing or handwriting.
Associated Features and Disorders
Problems commonly associated with Developmental Coordination Disorder include
delays in other nonmotor milestones. Associated disorders may include Phonological
Disorder, Expressive Language Disorder, and Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language
Disorder.
Prevalence
Prevalence of Developmental Coordination Disorder has been estimated to be as high
as 6% for children in the age range of 5-11 years.
Course
Recognition of Developmental Coordination Disorder usually occurs when the child first
attempts such tasks as running, holding a knife and fork, buttoning clothes, or playing
ball games. The course is variable. In some cases, lack of coordination continues through
adolescence and adulthood.
Differential Diagnosis
Developmental Coordination Disorder must be distinguished from motor impairments
that are due to a general medical condition. Problems in coordination may be associated
with specific neurological disorders (e.g., cerebral palsy, progressive lesions of the
cerebellum), but in these cases there is definite neural damage and abnormal findings
on neurological examination. If Mental Retardation is present, Developmental Coor-
dination Disorder can be diagnosed only if the motor difficulties are in excess of those
usually associated with the Mental Retardation. A diagnosis of Developmental Coordi-
nation Disorder is not given if the criteria are met for a Pervasive Developmental
Disorder. Individuals with Attention-Deficit/HyperactivityDisorder may fall, bump
into things, or knock things over, but this is usually due to distractibility and impulsive-
ness, rather than to a motor impairment. If criteria for both disorders are met, both
diagnoses can be given.
Diagnostic criteria for 315.4 Developmental
Coordination Disorder
A. Performance in daily activities that require motor coordination is sub-
stantially below that expected given the person's chronological age and
measured intelligence. This may be manifested by marked delays in
achieving motor milestones (e.g., walking, crawling, sitting), dropping
things, "clumsiness," poor performance in sports, or poor handwriting.
(continued)315.31 Expressive Language Disorder
55
D Diagnostic criteria for 315.4 Developmental Coordination
Disorder (continued)
B. The disturbance in Criterion A significantly interferes with academic
achievement or activities of daily living.
C. The disturbance is not due to a general medical condition (e.g., cerebral
palsy, hemiplegia, or muscular dystrophy) and does not meet criteria
for a Pervasive Developmental Disorder.
D. If Mental Retardation is present, the motor difficulties are in excess of
those usually associated with it.
Coding note: If a general medical (e.g., neurological) condition or sensory deficit
is present, code the condition on Axis III.
Communication Disorders
The following Communication Disorders are included in this section: Expressive
Language Disorder, Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder, Phonological Dis-
order, Stuttering, and Communication Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. They are
included in this classification to familiarize clinicians with the ways in which Commu-
nication Disorders present and to facilitate their differential diagnosis.
315.31 Expressive Language Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Expressive Language Disorder is an impairment in expressive
language development as demonstrated by scores on standardized individually admin-
istered measures of expressive language development substantially below those ob-
tained from standardized measures of both nonverbal intellectual capacity and receptive
language development (Criterion A). The difficulties may occur in communication
involving both verbal language and sign language. The language difficulties interfere
with academic or occupational achievement or with social communication (Criterion B).
The symptoms do not meet criteria for Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder
or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder (Criterion C). If Mental Retardation, a speech-
motor or sensory deficit, or environmental deprivation is present, the language difficulties
are in excess of those usually associated with these problems (Criterion D). If a
speech-motor or sensory deficit or neurological condition is present, it should be coded
on Axis III.
The linguistic features of the disorder vary depending on its severity and the age of
the child. These features include a limited amount of speech, limited range of vocabulary,
difficulty acquiring new words, word-finding or vocabulary errors, shortened sentences,56
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
simplified grammatical structures, limited varieties of grammatical structures (e.g., verb
forms), limited varieties of sentence types (e.g., imperatives, questions), omissions of
critical parts of sentences, use of unusual word order, and slow rate of language
development. Nonlinguistic functioning (as measured by performance intelligence tests)
and language comprehension skills are usually within normal limits. Expressive Lan-
guage Disorder may be either acquired or developmental. In the acquired type, an
impairment in expressive language occurs after a period of normal development as a
result of a neurological or other general medical condition (e.g., encephalitis, head
trauma, irradiation). In the developmental type, there is an impairment in expressive
language that is not associated with a neurological insult of known origin. Children with
this type often begin speaking late and progress more slowly than usual through the
various stages of expressive language development.
Associated Features and Disorders
The most common associated feature of Expressive Language Disorder in younger
children is Phonological Disorder. There may also be a disturbance in fluency and
language formulation involving an abnormally rapid rate and erratic rhythm of speech
and disturbances in language structure ("cluttering"). When Expressive Language
Disorder is acquired, additional speech difficulties are also common and may include
motor articulation problems, phonological errors, slow speech, syllable repetitions, and
monotonous intonation and stress patterns. Among school-age children, school and
learning problems (e.g., writing to dictation, copying sentences, and spelling) that
sometimes meet criteria for Learning Disorders are often associated with Expressive
Language Disorder. There may also be some mild impairment in receptive language
skills, but when this is significant, a diagnosis of Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language
Disorder should be made. A history of delay in reaching some motor milestones,
Developmental Coordination Disorder, and Enuresis are not uncommon. Social with-
drawal and some mental disorders such as Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder are
also commonly associated. Expressive Language Disorder may be accompanied by EEG
abnormalities, abnormal findings on neuroimaging, dysarthric or apraxic behaviors, or
other neurological signs.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Assessments of the development of communication abilities must take into account the
individual's cultural and language context, particularly for individuals growing up in
bilingual environments. The standardized measures of language development and of
nonverbal intellectual capacity must be relevant for the cultural and linguistic group.
The developmental type of Expressive Language Disorder is more common in males
than in females.
Prevalence
Estimates suggest that 3%-5% of children may be affected by the developmental type
of Expressive Language Disorder. The acquired type is less common.315.31 Expressive Language Disorder
57
Course
The developmental type of Expressive Language Disorder is usually recognized by age
3 years, although milder forms of the disorder may not become apparent until early
adolescence, when language ordinarily becomes more complex. The acquired type of
Expressive Language Disorder due to brain lesions, head trauma, or stroke may occur at
any age, and the onset is sudden. The outcome of the developmental type of Expressive
Language Disorder is variable. Approximately one-half of the children with this disorder
appear to outgrow it, whereas one-half appear to have more long-lasting difficulties. Most
children ultimately acquire more or less normal language abilities by late adolescence,
although subtle deficits may persist. In the acquired type of Expressive Language Disorder,
the course and prognosis are related to the severity and location of brain pathology, as well
as to the age of the child and the extent of language development at the time the disorder
is acquired. Clinical improvement in language abilities is sometimes rapid and complete,
whereas in other instances there may be incomplete recovery or progressive deficit.
Familial Pattern
It appears that the developmental type of Expressive Language Disorder is more likely
to occur in individuals who have a family history of Communication or Learning
Disorders. There is no evidence of familial aggregation in the acquired type.
Differential Diagnosis
Expressive Language Disorder is distinguished from Mixed Receptive-Expressive
Language Disorder by the presence in the latter of significant impairment in receptive
language. Expressive Language Disorder is not diagnosed if the criteria are met for
Autistic Disorder or another Pervasive Developmental Disorder. Autistic Disorder also
involves expressive language impairment but may be distinguished from Expressive and
Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorders by the characteristics of the communi-
cation impairment (e.g., stereotyped use of language) and by the presence of a qualitative
impairment in social interaction and restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of
behavior. Expressive and receptive language development may be impaired due to
Mental Retardation, a hearing impairment or other sensory deficit, a speech-
motor deficit, or severe environmental deprivation. The presence of these problems
may be established by intelligence testing, audiometric testing, neurological testing, and
history. If the language difficulties are in excess of those usually associated with these
problems, a concurrent diagnosis of Expressive Language or Mixed Receptive-Expressive
Language Disorder may be made. Children with expressive language delays due to
environmental deprivation may show rapid gains once the environmental problems are
ameliorated. In Disorder of Written Expression, there is a disturbance in writing
skills. If deficits in oral expression are also present, an additional diagnosis of Expressive
Language Disorder may be appropriate. Selective Mutism involves limited expressive
output that may mimic Expressive or Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder;
careful history and observation are necessary to determine the presence of normal
language in some settings. Acquired aphasia associated with a general medical
condition in childhood is often transient. A diagnosis of Expressive Language Disorder
is appropriate only if the language disturbance persists beyond the acute recovery period
for the etiological general medical condition (e.g., head trauma, viral infection).58
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Diagnostic criteria for 315.31 Expressive Language
Disorder
A. The scores obtained from standardized individually administered mea-
sures of expressive language development are substantially below those
obtained from standardized measures of both nonverbal intellectual
capacity and receptive language development. The disturbance may be
manifest clinically by symptoms that include having a markedly limited
vocabulary, making errors in tense, or having difficulty recalling words
or producing sentences with developmentally appropriate length or
complexity.
B. The difficulties with expressive language interfere with academic or
occupational achievement or with social communication.
C. Criteria are not met for Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder
or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder.
D. If Mental Retardation, a speech-motor or sensory deficit, or environmen-
tal deprivation is present, the language difficulties are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems.
Coding note: If a speech-motor or sensory deficit or a neurological condition is
present, code the condition on Axis III.
315.31 Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder is an impairment
in both receptive and expressive language development as demonstrated by scores on
standardized individually administered measures of both receptive and expressive
language development that are substantially below those obtained from standardized
measures of nonverbal intellectual capacity (Criterion A). The difficulties may occur in
communication involving both verbal language and sign language. The language
difficulties interfere with academic or occupational achievement or with social commu-
nication (Criterion B), and the symptoms do not meet criteria for a Pervasive Develop-
mental Disorder (Criterion C). If Mental Retardation, a speech-motor or sensory deficit,
or environmental deprivation is present, the language difficulties are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems (Criterion D). If a speech-motor or sensory deficit
or neurological condition is present, it should be coded on Axis III.
An individual with this disorder has the difficulties associated with Expressive
Language Disorder (e.g., a markedly limited vocabulary, errors in tense, difficulty
recalling words or producing sentences with developmentally appropriate length or
complexity, and general difficulty expressing ideas) and also has impairment in receptive
language development (e.g., difficulty understanding words, sentences, or specific types
of words). In mild cases, there may be difficulties only in understanding particular types315.31 Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder
59
of words (e.g., spatial terms) or statements (e.g., complex "if-then" sentences). In more
severe cases, there may be multiple disabilities, including an inability to understand basic
vocabulary or simple sentences, and deficits in various areas of auditory processing (e.g.,
discrimination of sounds, association of sounds and symbols, storage, recall, and
sequencing). Because the development of expressive language in childhood relies on
the acquisition of receptive skills, a pure receptive language disorder (analogous to a
Wernicke's aphasia in adults) is virtually never seen.
Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder may be either acquired or develop-
mental. In the acquired type, an impairment in receptive and expressive language occurs
after a period of normal development as a result of a neurological or other general
medical condition (e.g., encephalitis, head trauma, irradiation). In the developmental
type, there is an impairment in receptive and expressive language that is not associated
with a neurological insult of known origin. This type is characterized by a slow rate of
language development in which speech may begin late and advance slowly through the
stages of language development.
Associated Features and Disorders
The linguistic features of the production impairment in Mixed Receptive-Expressive
Language Disorder are similar to those that accompany Expressive Language Disorder.
The comprehension deficit is the primary feature that differentiates this disorder from
Expressive Language Disorder and this can vary depending on the severity of the disorder
and the age of the child. Impairments in language comprehension can be less obvious
than those in language production because they are not as readily apparent to the
observer and may appear only on formal assessment. The child may intermittently appear
not to hear or to be confused or not paying attention when spoken to. The child may
follow commands incorrectly, or not at all, and give tangential or inappropriate responses
to questions. The child may be exceptionally quiet or, conversely, very talkative.
Conversational skills (e.g., taking turns, maintaining a topic) are often quite poor or
inappropriate. Deficits in various areas of sensory information processing are common,
especially in temporal auditory processing (e.g., processing rate, association of sounds
and symbols, sequence of sounds and memory, attention to and discrimination of
sounds). Difficulty in producing motor sequences smoothly and quickly is also charac-
teristic. Phonological Disorder, Learning Disorders, and deficits in speech perception are
often present and accompanied by memory impairments. Other associated disorders are
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Developmental Coordination Disorder, and
Enuresis. Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder may be accompanied by EEG
abnormalities, abnormal findings on neuroimaging, and other neurological signs. A form
of acquired Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder that has its onset at about
ages 3-9 years and is accompanied by seizures is referred to as Landau-Kleffner
syndrome.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Assessments of the development of communication abilities must take into account the
individual's cultural and language context, particularly for individuals growing up in
bilingual environments. The standardized measures of language development and of
nonverbal intellectual capacity must be relevant for the cultural and linguistic group.
The developmental type is more prevalent in males than in females.60
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Prevalence
It is estimated that the developmental type of Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language
Disorder may occur in up to 3% of school-age children but is probably less common
than Expressive Language Disorder. Landau-Kleffner syndrome and other forms of the
acquired type of the disorder are rarer.
Course
The developmental type of Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder is usually
detectable before age 4 years. Severe forms of the disorder may be apparent by age
2 years. Milder forms may not be recognized until the child reaches elementary school,
where deficits in comprehension become more apparent. The acquired type of Mixed
Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder due to brain lesions, head trauma, or stroke
may occur at any age. The acquired type due to Landau-Kleffner syndrome (acquired
epileptic aphasia) usually occurs between ages 3 and 9 years. Many children with Mixed
Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder eventually acquire normal language abilities,
but the prognosis is worse than for those with Expressive Language Disorder. In the
acquired type of Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder, the course and
prognosis are related to the severity and location of brain pathology, as well as to the
age of the child and the extent of language development at the time the disorder is
acquired. Clinical improvement in language abilities is sometimes complete, whereas in
other instances there may be incomplete recovery or progressive deficit. Children with
more severe forms are likely to develop Learning Disorders.
Familial Pattern
The developmental type of Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder is more
common among first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the
general population. There is no evidence of familial aggregation in the acquired type of
the disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
See the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Expressive Language Disorder (p. 57).
Diagnostic criteria for 315.31 Mixed
Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder
A. The scores obtained from a battery of standardized individually admin-
istered measures of both receptive and expressive language develop-
ment are substantially below those obtained from standardized
measures of nonverbal intellectual capacity. Symptoms include those
for Expressive Language Disorder as well as difficulty understanding
words, sentences, or specific types of words, such as spatial terms.
(continued)315.39 Phonological Disorder
61
D Diagnostic criteria for 315.31 Mixed Receptive-Expressive
Language Disorder (continued)
B. The difficulties with receptive and expressive language significantly
interfere with academic or occupational achievement or with social
communication.
C. Criteria are not met for a Pervasive Developmental Disorder.
D. If Mental Retardation, a speech-motor or sensory deficit, or environmen-
tal deprivation is present, the language difficulties are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems.
Coding note: If a speech-motor or sensory deficit or a neurological condition is
present, code the condition on Axis III.
315.39 Phonological Disorder
(formerly Developmental Articulation Disorder)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Phonological Disorder is a failure to use developmentally
expected speech sounds that are appropriate for the individual's age and dialect
(Criterion A). This may involve errors in sound production, use, representation, or
organization such as, but not limited to, substitutions of one sound for another (use of
/t/ for target /k/ sound) or omissions of sounds (e.g., final consonants). The difficulties
in speech sound production interfere with academic or occupational achievement or
with social communication (Criterion B). If Mental Retardation, a speech-motor or
sensory deficit, or environmental deprivation is present, the speech difficulties are in
excess of those usually associated with these problems (Criterion C). If a speech-motor
or sensory deficit or neurological condition is present, it should be coded on Axis III.
Phonological Disorder includes phonological production (i.e., articulation) errors
that involve the failure to form speech sounds correctly and cognitively based forms of
phonological problems that involve a deficit in linguistic categorization of speech sound
(e.g., a difficulty in sorting out which sounds in the language make a difference in
meaning). Severity ranges from little or no effect on speech intelligibility to completely
unintelligible speech. Sound omissions are typically viewed as more severe than are
sound substitutions, which in turn are more severe than sound distortions. The most
frequently misarticulated sounds are those acquired later in the developmental sequence
(/, r, s, z, th, ch\ but in younger or more severely affected individuals, consonants and
vowels that develop earlier may also be affected. Lisping (i.e., misarticulation of sibilants)
is particularly common. Phonological Disorder may also involve errors of selection and
ordering of sounds within syllables and words (e.g., aks for ask).62
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Associated Features and Disorders
Although there may be an association with clear causal factors such as hearing
impairment, structural deficits of the oral peripheral speech mechanism (e.g., cleft
palate), neurological conditions (e.g., cerebral palsy), cognitive limitations (e.g., Mental
Retardation), or psychosocial problems, at least 2.5% of preschool children present with
Phonological Disorders of unknown or suspect origin, which are often referred to as
functional or developmental. There may be a delayed onset of speech.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Assessments of the development of communication abilities must take into account the
individual's cultural and language context, particularly for individuals growing up in
bilingual environments. Phonological Disorder is more prevalent in males.
Prevalence
Approximately 2%-3% of 6- and 7-year-olds present with moderate to severe Phonolog-
ical Disorder, although the prevalence of milder forms of this disorder is higher. The
prevalence falls to 0.5% by age 17 years.
Course
In severe Phonological Disorder, the child's speech may be relatively unintelligible even
to family members. Less severe forms of the disorder may not be recognized until the
child enters a preschool or school environment and has difficulty being understood by
those outside the immediate family. The course of the disorder is variable depending
on associated causes and severity. In mild presentations with unknown causes,
spontaneous recovery often occurs.
Familial Pattern
A familial pattern has been demonstrated for some forms of Phonological Disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Speech difficulties may be associated with Mental Retardation, a hearing impairment
or other sensory deficit, a speech-motor deficit, or severe environmental depri-
vation. The presence of these problems may be established by intelligence testing,
audiometric testing, neurological testing, and history. If the speech difficulties are in
excess of those usually associated with these problems, a concurrent diagnosis of
Phonological Disorder may be made. Problems limited to speech rhythm or voice are
not included as part of Phonological Disorder and instead are diagnosed as Stuttering
or Communication Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. Children with speech diffi-
culties due to environmental deprivation may show rapid gains once the environmental
problems are ameliorated.307.0 Stuttering
63
Diagnostic criteria for 315.39 Phonological Disorder
A. Failure to use developmentally expected speech sounds that are appro-
priate for age and dialect (e.g., errors in sound production, use,
representation, or organization such as, but not limited to, substitutions
of one sound for another [use of /t/ for target /k/ sound] or omissions
of sounds such as final consonants).
B. The difficulties in speech sound production interfere with academic or
occupational achievement or with social communication.
C. If Mental Retardation, a speech-motor or sensory deficit, or environmen-
tal deprivation is present, the speech difficulties are in excess of those
usually associated with these problems.
Coding note: If a speech-motor or sensory deficit or a neurological condition is
present, code the condition on Axis III.
307.0
Stuttering
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Stuttering is a disturbance in the normal fluency and time
patterning of speech that is inappropriate for the individual's age (Criterion A). This
disturbance is characterized by frequent repetitions or prolongations of sounds or
syllables (Criteria Al and A2). Various other types of speech dysfluencies may also be
involved, including interjections (Criterion A3), broken words (e.g., pauses within a
word) (Criterion A4), audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech)
(Criterion A5), circumlocutions (i.e., word substitutions to avoid problematic words)
(Criterion A6), words produced with an excess of physical tension (Criterion A7), and
monosyllabic whole word repetitions (e.g., "I-I-I-I see him") (Criterion A8). The
disturbance in fluency interferes with academic or occupational achievement or with
social communication (Criterion B). If a speech-motor or sensory deficit is present, the
speech difficulties are in excess of those usually associated with these problems
(Criterion C). If a speech-motor or sensory deficit or neurological disorder is present,
this condition should also be coded on Axis III. The extent of the disturbance varies
from situation to situation and often is more severe when there is special pressure to
communicate (e.g., giving a report at school, interviewing for a job). Stuttering is often
absent during oral reading, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to pets.
Associated Features and Disorders
At the onset of Stuttering, the speaker may not be aware of the problem, although
awareness and even fearful anticipation of the problem may develop later. The speaker
may attempt to avoid stuttering by linguistic mechanisms (e.g., altering the rate of speech,
avoiding certain speech situations such as telephoning or public speaking, or avoiding64
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
certain words or sounds). Stuttering may be accompanied by motor movements (e.g.,
eye blinks, tics, tremors of the lips or face, jerking of the head, breathing movements,
or fist clenching). Stress or anxiety have been shown to exacerbate Stuttering. Impairmen
of social functioning may result from associated anxiety, frustration, or low self-esteem.
In adults, Stuttering may limit occupational choice or advancement. Phonological
Disorder and Expressive Language Disorder occur at a higher frequency in individuals
with Stuttering than in the general population.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Stuttering in prepubertal children is 1% and drops to 0.8% in
adolescence. The male-to-female ratio is approximately 3:1.
Course
Retrospective studies of individuals with Stuttering report onset typically between ages
2 and 7 years (with peak onset at around age 5 years). Onset occurs before age 10 years
in 98% of cases. The onset is usually insidious, covering many months during which
episodic, unnoticed speech dysfluencies become a chronic problem. Typically, the
disturbance starts gradually, with repetition of initial consonants, words that are usually
the first words of a phrase, or long words. The child is generally not aware of Stuttering.
As the disorder progresses, there is a waxing and waning course. The dysfluencies
become more frequent, and the Stuttering occurs on the most meaningful words or
phrases in the utterance. As the child becomes aware of the speech difficulty,
mechanisms for avoiding the dysfluencies and emotional responses may occur. Some
research suggests that up to 80% of individuals with Stuttering recover, 'with up to 60%
recovering spontaneously. Recovery typically occurs before age 16 years.
Familial Pattern
Family and twin studies provide strong evidence of a genetic factor in the etiology of
Stuttering. The presence of a Phonological Disorder or the developmental type of
Expressive Language Disorder, or a family history of these, increases the likelihood of
Stuttering. The risk of Stuttering among first-degree biological relatives is more than three
times the risk in the general population. For men with a history of Stuttering, about 10%
of their daughters and 20% of their sons will stutter.
Differential
Diagnosis
Speech difficulties may be associated with a hearing impairment or other sensory
deficit or a speech-motor deficit. In instances where the speech difficulties are in
excess of those usually associated with these problems, a concurrent diagnosis of
Stuttering may be made. Stuttering must be distinguished from normal dysfluencies
that occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase
repetitions (e.g., "I want, I want ice cream"), incomplete phrases, interjections, unfilled
pauses, and parenthetical remarks.307.9 Communication Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
65
Diagnostic criteria for 307.0 Stuttering
A. Disturbance in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech
(inappropriate for the individual's age), characterized by frequent
occurrences of one or more of the following:
(1) sound and syllable repetitions
(2) sound prolongations
(3) interjections
(4) broken words (e.g., pauses within a word)
(5) audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech)
(6) circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic words)
(7) words produced with an excess of physical tension
(8) monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., "I-I-I-I see him")
B. The disturbance in fluency interferes with academic or occupational
achievement or with social communication.
C. If a speech-motor or sensory deficit is present, the speech difficulties
are in excess of those usually associated with these problems.
Coding note: If a speech-motor or sensory deficit or a neurological condition is
present, code the condition on Axis III.
307.9 Communication Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders in communication that do not meet criteria for any specific
Communication Disorder; for example, a voice disorder (i.e., an abnormality of vocal
pitch, loudness, quality, tone, or resonance).
Pervasive Developmental Disorders
Pervasive Developmental Disorders are characterized by severe and pervasive impair-
ment in several areas of development: reciprocal social interaction skills, communication
skills, or the presence of stereotyped behavior, interests, and activities. The qualitative
impairments that define these conditions are distinctly deviant relative to the individual's
developmental level or mental age. This section contains Autistic Disorder, Rett's
Disorder, Childhood Disintegrative Disorder, Asperger's Disorder, and Pervasive Devel-
opmental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. These disorders are usually evident in the
first years of life and are often associated with some degree of Mental Retardation, which,
if present, should be coded on Axis II. The Pervasive Developmental Disorders are
sometimes observed with a diverse group of other general medical conditions (e.g.,
chromosomal abnormalities, congenital infections, structural abnormalities of the central66
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
nervous system). If such conditions are present, they should be noted on Axis III.
Although terms like "psychosis" and "childhood schizophrenia" were once used to refer
to individuals with these conditions, there is considerable evidence to suggest that the
Pervasive Developmental Disorders are distinct from Schizophrenia (however, an
individual with Pervasive Developmental Disorder may occasionally later develop
Schizophrenia).
299.00 Autistic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Autistic Disorder are the presence of markedly abnormal or
impaired development in social interaction and communication and a markedly
restricted repertoire of activity and interests. Manifestations of the disorder vary greatly
depending on the developmental level and chronological age of the individual. Autistic
Disorder is sometimes referred to as early infantile autism, childhood autism, or
Kanner's autism.
The impairment in reciprocal social interaction is gross and sustained. There may
be marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors (e.g., eye-to-eye gaze,
facial expression, body postures and gestures) to regulate social interaction and
communication (Criterion Ala). There may be failure to develop peer relationships
appropriate to developmental level (Criterion Alb) that may take different forms at
different ages. Younger individuals may have little or no interest in establishing
friendships. Older individuals may have an interest in friendship but lack understanding
of the conventions of social interaction. There may be a lack of spontaneous seeking to
share enjoyment, interests, or achievements with other people (e.g., not showing,
bringing, or pointing out objects they find interesting) (Criterion Ale). Lack of social or
emotional reciprocity may be present (e.g., not actively participating in simple social
play or games, preferring solitary activities, or involving others in activities only as tools
or "mechanical" aids) (Criterion Aid). Often an individual's awareness of others is
markedly impaired. Individuals with this disorder may be oblivious to other children
(including siblings), may have no concept of the needs of others, or may not notice
another person's distress.
The impairment in communication is also marked and sustained and affects both
verbal and nonverbal skills. There may be delay in, or total lack of, the development of
spoken language (Criterion A2a). In individuals who do speak, there may be marked
impairment in the ability to initiate or sustain a conversation with others (Criterion A2b),
or a stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language (Criterion A2c).
There may also be a lack of varied, spontaneous make-believe play or social imitative
play appropriate to developmental level (Criterion A2d). When speech does develop,
the pitch, intonation, rate, rhythm, or stress may be abnormal (e.g., tone of voice may
be monotonous or contain questionlike rises at ends of statements). Grammatical
structures are often immature and include stereotyped and repetitive use of language
(e.g., repetition of words or phrases regardless of meaning; repeating jingles or
commercials) or metaphorical language (i.e., language that can only be understood
clearly by those familiar with the individual's communication style). A disturbance in
the comprehension of language may be evidenced by an inability to understand simple
questions, directions, or jokes. Imaginative play is often absent or markedly impaired.299.00 Autistic Disorder
67
These individuals also tend not to engage in the simple imitation games or routines of
infancy or early childhood or do so only out of context or in a mechanical way.
Individuals with Autistic Disorder have restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped
patterns of behavior, interests, and activities. There may be an encompassing pre-
occupation with one or more stereotyped and restricted patterns of interest that is
abnormal either in intensity or focus (Criterion A3a); an apparently inflexible adherence
to specific, nonfunctional routines or rituals (Criterion A3b); stereotyped and repetitive
motor mannerisms (Criterion A3c); or a persistent preoccupation with parts of objects
(Criterion A3d). Individuals with Autistic Disorder display a markedly restricted range
of interests and are often preoccupied with one narrow interest (e.g., with amassing
facts about meteorology or baseball statistics). They may line up an exact number of
play things in the same manner over and over again or repetitively mimic the actions
of a television actor. They may insist on sameness and show resistance to or distress
over trivial changes (e.g., a younger child may have a catastrophic reaction to a minor
change in the environment such as a new set of curtains or a change in place at the
dinner table). There is often an interest in nonfunctional routines or rituals or an
unreasonable insistence on following routines (e.g., taking exactly the same route to
school every day). Stereotyped body movements include the hands (clapping, finger
flicking) or whole body (rocking, dipping, and swaying). Abnormalities of posture (e.g.,
walking on tiptoe, odd hand movements and body postures) may be present. These
individuals show a persistent preoccupation with parts of objects (buttons, parts of the
body). There may also be a fascination with movement (e.g., the spinning wheels of
toys, the opening and closing of doors, an electric fan or other rapidly revolving object).
The person may be highly attached to some inanimate object (e.g., a piece of string or
a rubber band).
The disturbance must be manifest by delays or abnormal functioning in at least one
of the following areas prior to age 3 years: social interaction, language as used in social
communication, or symbolic or imaginative play (Criterion B). There is typically no
period of unequivocally normal development, although 1 or 2 years of relatively normal
development has been reported in some instances. In a minority of cases, parents report
regression in language development, generally manifest as the cessation of speech after
a child has acquired from 5 to 10 words. By definition, if there is a period of normal
development, it cannot extend past age 3 years. The disturbance must not be better
accounted for by Rett's Disorder or Childhood Disintegrative Disorder (Criterion C).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. In most cases, there is an
associated diagnosis of Mental Retardation, commonly in the moderate range (IQ 35-50).
Approximately 75% of children with Autistic Disorder function at a retarded level. There
may be abnormalities in the development of cognitive skills. The profile of cognitive
skills is usually uneven, regardless of the general level of intelligence (e.g., a ^-year-old
girl with Autistic Disorder may be able to read, i.e., hyperlexia). In many higher-
functioning children with Autistic Disorder, the level of receptive language (i.e., language
comprehension) is below that of expressive language (e.g., vocabulary). Individuals with
Autistic Disorder may have a range of behavioral symptoms, including hyperactivity,
short attention span, impulsivity, aggressiveness, self-injurious behaviors, and, particu
larly in young children, temper tantrums. There may be odd responses to sensory stimuli68
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
(e.g., a high threshold for pain, oversensitivity to sounds or being touched, exaggerated
reactions to light or odors, fascination with certain stimuli). There may be abnormalities
in eating (e.g., limiting diet to a few foods, Pica) or sleeping (e.g., recurrent awakening
at night with rocking). Abnormalities of mood or affect (e.g., giggling or weeping for
no apparent reason, an apparent absence of emotional reaction) may be present. There
may be a lack of fear in response to real dangers, and excessive fearfulness in response
to harmless objects. A variety of self-injurious behaviors may be present (e.g., head
banging or finger, hand, or wrist biting). In adolescence or early adult life, individuals
with Autistic Disorder who have the intellectual capacity for insight may become
depressed in response to the realization of their serious impairment.
Associated laboratory findings. When Autistic Disorder is associated with a general
medical condition, laboratory findings consistent with the general medical condition will
be observed. There have been reports of group differences in measures of serotonergic
activity, but these are not diagnostic for Autistic Disorder. Imaging studies may be
abnormal in some cases, but no specific pattern has been clearly identified. EEC
abnormalities are common even in the absence of seizure disorders.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Various nonspecific neurological symptoms or signs may be noted (e.g., primitive
reflexes, delayed development of hand dominance) in Autistic Disorder. The condition
is sometimes observed in association with a neurological or other general medical
condition (e.g., encephalitis, phenylketonuria, tuberous sclerosis, fragile X syndrome,
anoxia during birth, maternal rubella). Seizures may develop (particularly in adoles-
cence) in as many as 25% of cases. When other general medical conditions are present,
they should be noted on Axis III.
Specific Age and Gender Features
The nature of the impairment in social interaction may change over time in Autistic
Disorder and may vary depending on the developmental level of the individual. In
infants, there may be a failure to cuddle; an indifference or aversion to affection or
physical contact; a lack of eye contact, facial responsiveness, or socially directed smiles;
and a failure to respond to their parents' voices. As a result, parents may be concerned
initially that the child is deaf. Young children with this disorder may treat adults as
interchangeable or may cling mechanically to a specific person. Over the course of
development, the child may become more willing to be passively engaged in social
interaction and may even become more interested in social interaction. However, even
in such instances, the child tends to treat other people in unusual ways (e.g., expecting
other people to answer ritualized questions in specific ways, having little sense of other
people's boundaries, and being inappropriately intrusive in social interaction). In older
individuals, tasks involving long-term memory (e.g., train timetables, historical dates,
chemical formulas, or recall of the exact words of songs heard years before) may be
excellent, but the information tends to be repeated over and over again, regardless of
the appropriateness of the information to the social context. Rates of the disorder are
four to five times higher in males than in females. Females with the disorder are more
likely, however, to exhibit more severe Mental Retardation.299.00 Autistic Disorder
69
Prevalence
Epidemiological studies suggest rates of Autistic Disorder of 2-5 cases per 10,000
individuals.
Course
By definition, the onset of Autistic Disorder is prior to age 3 years. In some instances,
parents will report that they have been worried about the child since birth or shortly
afterward because of the child's lack of interest in social interaction. Manifestations o
the disorder in infancy are more subtle and difficult to define than those seen after age
2 years. In a minority of cases, the child may be reported to have developed normally
for the first year (or even 2 years) of life. Autistic Disorder follows a continuous course.
In school-age children and adolescents, developmental gains in some areas are common
(e.g., increased interest in social functioning as the child reaches school age). Some
individuals deteriorate behaviorally during adolescence, whereas others improve. Lan-
guage skills (e.g., presence of communicative speech) and overall intellectual level are
the strongest factors related to ultimate prognosis. Available follow-up studies suggest
that only a small percentage of individuals with the disorder go on as adults to live and
work independently. In about one-third of cases, some degree of partial independence
is possible. The highest functioning adults with Autistic Disorder typically continue to
exhibit problems in social interaction and communication along with markedly restricted
interests and activities.
Familial Pattern
There is an increased risk of Autistic Disorder among siblings of individuals with the
disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
Periods of developmental regression may be observed in normal development, but these
are neither as severe or as prolonged as in Autistic Disorder. Autistic Disorder must be
differentiated from other Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Rett's Disorder
differs from Autistic Disorder in its characteristic sex ratio and pattern of deficits. Rett's
Disorder has been diagnosed only in females, whereas Autistic Disorder occurs much
more frequently in males. In Rett's Disorder, there is a characteristic pattern of head
growth deceleration, loss of previously acquired purposeful hand skills, and the
appearance of poorly coordinated gait or trunk movements. Particularly during the
preschool years, individuals with Rett's Disorder may exhibit difficulties in social
interaction similar to those observed in Autistic Disorder, but these tend to be transient.
Autistic Disorder differs from Childhood Disintegrative Disorder, which has a
distinctive pattern of developmental regression following at least 2 years of normal
development. In Autistic Disorder, developmental abnormalities are usually noted within
the first year of life. When information on early development is unavailable or when it
is not possible to document the required period of normal development, the diagnosis
of Autistic Disorder should be made. Asperger's Disorder can be distinguished from
Autistic Disorder by the lack of delay in language development. Asperger's Disorder is
not diagnosed if criteria are met for Autistic Disorder.70
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after years of normal, or
near normal, development. An additional diagnosis of Schizophrenia can be made if an
individual with Autistic Disorder develops the characteristic features of Schizophrenia
(see p. 274) with active-phase symptoms of prominent delusions or hallucinations that
last for at least 1 month. In Selective Mutism, the child usually exhibits appropriate
communication skills in certain contexts and does not have the severe impairment in
social interaction and the restricted patterns of behavior associated with Autistic Disorder.
In Expressive Language Disorder and Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language
Disorder, there is a language impairment, but it is not associated with the presence of
a qualitative impairment in social interaction and restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped
patterns of behavior. It is sometimes difficult to determine whether an additional
diagnosis of Autistic Disorder is warranted in an individual with Mental Retardation,
especially if the Mental Retardation is Severe or Profound. An additional diagnosis of
Autistic Disorder is reserved for those situations in which there are qualitative deficits
in social and communicative skills and the specific behaviors characteristic of Autistic
Disorder are present. Motor stereotypies are characteristic of Autistic Disorder; an
additional diagnosis of Stereotypic Movement Disorder is not given when these are
better accounted for as part of the presentation of Autistic Disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 299.00 Autistic Disorder
A. A total of six (or more) items from (1), (2), and (3), with at least two
from (1), and one each from (2) and (3):
(1) qualitative impairment in social interaction, as manifested by at
least two of the following:
(a) marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors
such as eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and
gestures to regulate social interaction
(b) failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to develop-
mental level
(c) a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests,
or achievements with other people (e.g., by a lack of showing,
bringing, or pointing out objects of interest)
(d) lack of social or emotional reciprocity
(2) qualitative impairments in communication as manifested by at least
one of the following:
(a) delay in, or total lack of, the development of spoken language
(not accompanied by an attempt to compensate through
alternative modes of communication such as gesture or mime)
(b) in individuals with adequate speech, marked impairment in
the ability to initiate or sustain a conversation with others
(c) stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic
language
(d) lack of varied, spontaneous make-believe play or social
imitative play appropriate to developmental level
(continued)299.80 Rett's Disorder
71
D Diagnostic criteria for 299.00 Autistic Disorder (continued)
(3) restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests,
and activities, as manifested by at least one of the following:
(a) encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped
and restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in
intensity or focus
(b) apparently inflexible adherence to specific, nonfunctional
routines or rituals
(c) stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (e.g., hand or
finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole-body move-
ments)
(d) persistent preoccupation with parts of objects
B. Delays or abnormal functioning in at least one of the following areas,
with onset prior to age 3 years: (1) social interaction, (2) language as
used in social communication, or (3) symbolic or imaginative play.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by Rett's Disorder or
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder.
299.80 Rett's Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Rett's Disorder is the development of multiple specific deficits
following a period of normal functioning after birth. Individuals have an apparently
normal prenatal and perinatal period (Criterion Al) with normal psychomotor develop-
ment through the first 5 months of life (Criterion A2). Head circumference at birth is also
within normal limits (Criterion A3). Between ages 5 and 48 months, head growth
decelerates (Criterion Bl). There is a loss of previously acquired purposeful hand skills
between ages 5 and 30 months, with the subsequent development of characteristic
stereotyped hand movements resembling hand-wringing or hand washing (Criterion
B2). Interest in the social environment diminishes in the first few years after the onset
of the disorder (Criterion B3), although social interaction may often develop later in the
course. Problems develop in the coordination of gait or trunk movements (Criterion B4).
There is also severe impairment in expressive and receptive language development, with
severe psychomotor retardation (Criterion B5).
Associated Features and Disorders
Rett's Disorder is typically associated with Severe or Profound Mental Retardation, which,
if present, should be coded on Axis II. There are no specific laboratory findings
associated with the disorder. There may be an increased frequency of EEC abnormalities72
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
and seizure disorder in individuals with Rett's Disorder. Nonspecific abnormalities on
brain imaging have been reported.
Prevalence
Data are limited to mostly case series, and it appears that Rett's Disorder is much less
common than Autistic Disorder. This disorder has been reported only in females.
Course
The pattern of developmental regression is highly distinctive. Rett's Disorder has its onset
prior to age 4 years, usually in the first or second year of life. The duration of the disorder
is lifelong, and the loss of skills is generally persistent and progressive. In most instances,
recovery is quite limited, although some very modest developmental gains may be made
and interest in social interaction may be observed as individuals enter later childhood
or adolescence. The communicative and behavioral difficulties usually remain relatively
constant throughout life.
Differential Diagnosis
Periods of developmental regression may be observed in normal development, but these
are neither as severe or as prolonged as in Rett's Disorder. For the differential between
Rett's Disorder and Autistic Disorder, see p. 69. Rett's Disorder differs from Childhood
Disintegrative Disorder and Asperger's Disorder in its characteristic sex ratio, onset,
and pattern of deficits. Rett's Disorder has been diagnosed only in females, whereas
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder and Asperger's Disorder appear to be more common
in males. The onset of symptoms in Rett's Disorder can begin as early as age 5 months,
whereas in Childhood Disintegrative Disorder the period of normal development is
typically more prolonged (i.e., at least until age 2 years). In Rett's Disorder, there is a
characteristic pattern of head growth deceleration, loss of previously acquired purposeful
hand skills, and the appearance of poorly coordinated gait or trunk movements. In
contrast to Asperger's Disorder, Rett's Disorder is characterized by a severe impairment
in expressive and receptive language development.
Diagnostic criteria for 299.80 Rett's Disorder
A. All of the following:
(1) apparently normal prenatal and perinatal development
(2) apparently normal psychomotor development through the first
5 months after birth
(3) normal head circumference at birth
B. Onset of all of the following after the period of normal development:
(1) deceleration of head growth between ages 5 and 48 months
(continued)299.10 Childhood Disintegrative Disorder
73
D Diagnostic criteria for 299.80 Rett's Disorder (continued)
(2) loss of previously acquired purposeful hand skills between ages 5
and 30 months with the subsequent development of stereotyped
hand movements (e.g., hand-wringing or hand washing)
(3) loss of social engagement early in the course (although often social
interaction develops later)
(4) appearance of poorly coordinated gait or trunk movements
(5) severely impaired expressive and receptive language development
with severe psychomotor retardation
299.10 Childhood Disintegrative Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Childhood Disintegrative Disorder is a marked regression in
multiple areas of functioning following a period of at least 2 years of apparently normal
development (Criterion A). Apparently normal development is reflected in age-
appropriate verbal and nonverbal communication, social relationships, play, and
adaptive behavior. After the first 2 years of life (but before age 10 years), the child has
a clinically significant loss of previously acquired skills in at least two of the following
areas: expressive or receptive language, social skills or adaptive behavior, bowel or
bladder control, play, or motor skills (Criterion B). Individuals with this disorder exhibit
the social and communicative deficits and behavioral features generally observed in
Autistic Disorder (see p. 66). There is qualitative impairment in social interaction
(Criterion Cl) and in communication (Criterion C2), and restricted, repetitive, and
stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and activities (Criterion C3). The disturbance
is not better accounted for by another specific Pervasive Developmental Disorder or by
Schizophrenia (Criterion D). This condition has also been termed Heller's syndrome,
dementia infantilis, or disintegrativepsychosis.
Associated Features and Disorders
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder is usually associated with Severe Mental Retardation
which, if present, should be coded on Axis II. Various nonspecific neurological
symptoms or signs may be noted. There seems to be an increased frequency of EEC
abnormalities and seizure disorder. Although it appears likely that the condition is the
result of some insult to the developing central nervous system, no precise mechanism
has been identified. The condition is occasionally observed in association with a general
medical condition (e.g., metachromatic leukodystrophy, Schilder's disease) that might
account for the developmental regression. In most instances, however, extensive
investigation does not reveal such a condition. If a neurological or other general medical
condition is associated with the disorder, it should be recorded on Axis III. The laborator
findings will reflect any associated general medical conditions.74
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Prevalence
Epidemiological data are limited, but Childhood Disintegrative Disorder appears to be
very rare and much less common than Autistic Disorder. Although initial studies
suggested an equal sex ratio, the most recent data suggest that the condition is more
common among males.
Course
By definition, Childhood Disintegrative Disorder can only be diagnosed if the symptoms
are preceded by at least 2 years of normal development and the onset is prior to age 10
years. When the period of normal development has been quite prolonged (5 or more
years), it is particularly important to conduct a thorough physical and neurological
examination to assess for the presence of a general medical condition. In most cases,
the onset is between ages 3 and 4 years and may be insidious or abrupt. Premonitory
signs can include increased activity levels, irritability, and anxiety followed by a loss of
speech and other skills. Usually the loss of skills reaches a plateau, after which some
limited improvement may occur, although improvement is rarely marked. In other
instances, especially when the disorder is associated with a progressive neurological
condition, the loss of skills is progressive. This disorder follows a continuous course,
and in the majority of cases, the duration is lifelong. The social, communicative, and
behavioral difficulties remain relatively constant throughout life.
Differential Diagnosis
Periods of regression may be observed in normal development, but these are neither as
severe or as prolonged as in Childhood Disintegrative Disorder. Childhood Disintegrative
Disorder must be differentiated from other Pervasive Developmental Disorders. For
the differential diagnosis with Autistic Disorder, see p. 69. For the differential diagnosis
with Rett's Disorder, see p. 72. In contrast to Asperger's Disorder, Childhood
Disintegrative Disorder is characterized by a clinically significant loss in previously
acquired skills and a greater likelihood of Mental Retardation. In Asperger's Disorder,
there is no delay in language development and no marked loss of developmental skills.
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder must be differentiated from a dementia with
onset during infancy or childhood. Dementia occurs as a consequence of the direct
physiological effects of a general medical condition (e.g., head trauma), whereas
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder typically occurs in the absence of an associated
general medical condition.
Diagnostic criteria for 299.10 Childhood
Disintegrative Disorder
A. Apparently normal development for at least the first 2 years after birth
as manifested by the presence of age-appropriate verbal and nonverbal
communication, social relationships, play, and adaptive behavior.
(continued)299.80 Asperger's Disorder
75
D Diagnostic criteria for 299.10 Childhood Disintegrative
Disorder (continued)
B. Clinically significant loss of previously acquired skills (before age
10 years) in at least two of the following areas:
(1) expressive or receptive language
(2) social skills or adaptive behavior
(3) bowel or bladder control
(4) play
(5) motor skills
C. Abnormalities of functioning in at least two of the following areas:
(1) qualitative impairment in social interaction (e.g., impairment in
nonverbal behaviors, failure to develop peer relationships, lack of
social or emotional reciprocity)
(2) qualitative impairments in communication (e.g., delay or lack of
spoken language, inability to initiate or sustain a conversation,
stereotyped and repetitive use of language, lack of varied make-
believe play)
(3) restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behavior, inter-
ests, and activities, including motor stereotypies and mannerisms
D. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another specific Pervasive
Developmental Disorder or by Schizophrenia.
299.80 Asperger's Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Asperger's Disorder are severe and sustained impairment in
social interaction (Criterion A) and the development of restricted, repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, and activities (Criterion B) (see p. 66 in Autistic Disorder for a
discussion of Criteria A and B). The disturbance must cause clinically significant
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
C). In contrast to Autistic Disorder, there are no clinically significant delays in language
(e.g., single words are used by age 2 years, communicative phrases are used by age
3 years) (Criterion D). In addition, there are no clinically significant delays in cognitive
development or in the development of age-appropriate self-help skills, adaptive behavior
(other than in social interaction), and curiosity about the environment in childhood
(Criterion E). The diagnosis is not given if the criteria are met for any other specific
Pervasive Developmental Disorder or for Schizophrenia (Criterion F).76
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Associated Features and Disorders
Asperger's Disorder is sometimes observed in association with general medical condi-
tions that should be coded on Axis III. Various nonspecific neurological symptoms or
signs may be noted. Motor milestones may be delayed, and motor clumsiness is often
observed.
Prevalence
Information on the prevalence of Asperger's Disorder is limited, but it appears to be
more common in males.
Course
Asperger's Disorder appears to have a somewhat later onset than Autistic Disorder, or
at least to be recognized somewhat later. Motor delays or motor clumsiness may be
noted in the preschool period. Difficulties in social interaction may become more
apparent in the context of school. It is during this time that particular idiosyncratic or
circumscribed interests (e.g., a fascination with train schedules) may appear or be
recognized as such. As adults, individuals with the condition may have problems with
empathy and modulation of social interaction. This disorder apparently follows a
continuous course and, in the vast majority of cases, the duration is lifelong.
Familial Pattern
Although the available data are limited, there appears to be an increased frequency of
Asperger's Disorder among family members of individuals who have the disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
Asperger's Disorder is not diagnosed if criteria are met for another Pervasive Develop-
mental Disorder or for Schizophrenia. For the differential diagnosis with Autistic
Disorder, see p. 69. For the differential diagnosis with Rett's Disorder, see p. 72. For
the differential diagnosis with Childhood Disintegrative Disorder, see p. 74.
Asperger's Disorder must also be distinguished from Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
and Schizoid Personality Disorder. Asperger's Disorder and Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder share repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior. In contrast to Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder, Asperger's Disorder is characterized by a qualitative impairment
in social interaction and a more restricted pattern of interests and activities. In contrast
to Schizoid Personality Disorder, Asperger's Disorder is characterized by stereotyped
behaviors and interests and by more severely impaired social interaction.299.80 Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
77
Diagnostic criteria for 299.80 Asperger's Disorder
A. Qualitative impairment in social interaction, as manifested by at least
two of the following:
(1) marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors such
as eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and gestures
to regulate social interaction
(2) failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to developmental
level
(3) a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests, or
achievements with other people (e.g., by a lack of showing,
bringing, or pointing out objects of interest to other people)
(4) lack of social or emotional reciprocity
B. Restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and
activities, as manifested by at least one of the following:
(1) encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped and
restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in intensity or
focus
(2) apparently inflexible adherence to specific, nonfunctional routines
or rituals
(3) stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (e.g., hand or finger
flapping or twisting, or complex whole-body movements)
(4) persistent preoccupation with parts of objects
C. The disturbance causes clinically significant impairment in social, occu-
pational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. There is no clinically significant general delay in language (e.g., single
words used by age 2 years, communicative phrases used by age 3 years).
E. There is no clinically significant delay in cognitive development or in
the development of age-appropriate self-help skills, adaptive behavior
(other than in social interaction), and curiosity about the environment
in childhood.
F. Criteria are not met for another specific Pervasive Developmental
Disorder or Schizophrenia.
299.80 Pervasive Developmental Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified (Including Atypical Autism)
This category should be used when there is a severe and pervasive impairment in the
development of reciprocal social interaction or verbal and nonverbal communication
skills, or when stereotyped behavior, interests, and activities are present, but the criteria78
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
are not met for a specific Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, Schizotypal
Personality Disorder, or Avoidant Personality Disorder. For example, this category
includes "atypical autism"—presentations that do not meet the criteria for Autistic
Disorder because of late age at onset, atypical symptomatology, or subthreshold
symptomatology, or all of these.
Attention-Deficit and Disruptive Behavior Disorders
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is a persistent pattern
of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that is more frequent and severe than is
typically observed in individuals at a comparable level of development (Criterion A).
Some hyperactive-impulsive or inattentive symptoms that cause impairment must have
been present before age 7 years, although many individuals are diagnosed after the
symptoms have been present for a number of years (Criterion B). Some impairment from
the symptoms must be present in at least two settings (e.g., at home and at school or
work) (Criterion C). There must be clear evidence of interference with developmentally
appropriate social, academic, or occupational functioning (Criterion D). The disturbance
does not occur exclusively during the course of a Pervasive Developmental Disorder,
Schizophrenia, or other Psychotic Disorder and is not better accounted for by another
mental disorder (e.g., a Mood Disorder, Anxiety Disorder, Dissociative Disorder, or
Personality Disorder) (Criterion E).
Inattention may be manifest in academic, occupational, or social situations. Individ-
uals with this disorder may fail to give close attention to details or may make careless
mistakes in schoolwork or other tasks (Criterion Ala). Work is often messy and
performed carelessly and without considered thought. Individuals often have difficulty
sustaining attention in tasks or play activities and find it hard to persist with tasks until
completion (Criterion Alb). They often appear as if their mind is elsewhere or as if they
are not listening or did not hear what has just been said (Criterion Ale). There may be
frequent shifts from one uncompleted activity to another. Individuals diagnosed with
this disorder may begin a task, move on to another, then turn to yet something else,
prior to completing any one task. They often do not follow through on requests or
instructions and fail to complete schoolwork, chores, or other duties (Criterion Aid).
Failure to complete tasks should be considered in making this diagnosis only if it is due
to inattention as opposed to other possible reasons (e.g., a failure to understand
instructions). These individuals often have difficulties organizing tasks and activities
(Criterion Ale). Tasks that require sustained mental effort are experienced as unpleasant
and markedly aversive. As a result, these individuals typically avoid or have a strong
dislike for activities that demand sustained self-application and mental effort or that
require organizational demands or close concentration (e.g., homework or paperwork)
(Criterion AID. This avoidance must be due to the person's difficulties with attention
and not due to a primary oppositional attitude, although secondary oppositionalism may
also occur. Work habits are often disorganized and the materials necessary for doingAttention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
79
the task are often scattered, lost, or carelessly handled and damaged (Criterion Alg).
Individuals with this disorder are easily distracted by irrelevant stimuli and frequently
interrupt ongoing tasks to attend to trivial noises or events that are usually and easily
ignored by others (e.g., a car honking, a background conversation) (Criterion Alh). They
are often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., missing appointments, forgetting to bring
lunch) (Criterion Ali). In social situations, inattention may be expressed as frequent
shifts in conversation, not listening to others, not keeping one's mind on conversations,
and not following details or rules of games or activities.
Hyperactivity may be manifested by fidgetiness or squirming in one's seat (Criterion
A2a), by not remaining seated when expected to do so (Criterion A2b), by excessive
running or climbing in situations where it is inappropriate (Criterion A2c), by having
difficulty playing or engaging quietly in leisure activities (Criterion A2d), by appearing
to be often "on the go" or as if "driven by a motor" (Criterion A2e), or by talking
excessively (Criterion A2f). Hyperactivity may vary with the individual's age and
developmental level, and the diagnosis should be made cautiously in young children.
Toddlers and preschoolers with this disorder differ from normally active young children
by being constantly on the go and into everything; they dart back and forth, are "out of
the door before their coat is on," jump or climb on furniture, run through the house,
and have difficulty participating in sedentary group activities in preschool classes (e.g.,
listening to a story). School-age children display similar behaviors but usually with less
frequency or intensity than toddlers and preschoolers. They have difficulty remaining
seated, get up frequently, and squirm in, or hang on to the edge of, their seat. They
fidget with objects, tap their hands, and shake their feet or legs excessively. They often
get up from the table during meals, while watching television, or while doing homework;
they talk excessively; and they make excessive noise during quiet activities. In
adolescents and adults, symptoms of hyperactivity take the form of feelings of restless-
ness and difficulty engaging in quiet sedentary activities.
Impulsivity manifests itself as impatience, difficulty in delaying responses, blurting
out answers before questions have been completed (Criterion A2g), difficulty awaiting
one's turn (Criterion A2h), and frequently interrupting or intruding on others to the point
of causing difficulties in social, academic, or occupational settings (Criterion A2i). Others
may complain that they cannot get a word in edgewise. Individuals with this disorder
typically make comments out of turn, fail to listen to directions, initiate conversations at
inappropriate times, interrupt others excessively, intrude on others, grab objects from
others, touch things they are not supposed to touch, and clown around. Impulsivity may
lead to accidents (e.g., knocking over objects, banging into people, grabbing a hot pan)
and to engagement in potentially dangerous activities without consideration of possible
consequences (e.g., riding a skateboard over extremely rough terrain).
Behavioral manifestations usually appear in multiple contexts, including home,
school, work, and social situations. To make the diagnosis, some impairment must be
present in at least two settings (Criterion C). It is very unusual for an individual to display
the same level of dysfunction in all settings or within the same setting at all times.
Symptoms typically worsen in situations that require sustained attention or mental effort
or that lack intrinsic appeal or novelty (e.g., listening to classroom teachers, doing class
assignments, listening to or reading lengthy materials, or working on monotonous,
repetitive tasks). Signs of the disorder may be minimal or absent when the person is
under very strict control, is in a novel setting, is engaged in especially interesting
activities, is in a one-to-one situation (e.g., the clinician's office), or while the person
experiences frequent rewards for appropriate behavior. The symptoms are more likely80
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
to occur in group situations (e.g., in playgroups, classrooms, or work environments).
The clinician should therefore inquire about the individual's behavior in a variety of
situations within each setting.
Subtypes
Although most individuals have symptoms of both inattention and hyperactivity-
impulsivity, there are some individuals in whom one or the other pattern is predominant.
The appropriate subtype (for a current diagnosis) should be indicated based on the
predominant symptom pattern for the past 6 months.
314.01 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Combined Type. This
subtype should be used if six (or more) symptoms of inattention and six (or more)
symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity have persisted for at least 6 months. Most
children and adolescents with the disorder have the Combined Type. It is not
known whether the same is true of adults with the disorder.
314.00 Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Predominantly Inatten-
tive Type. This subtype should be used if six (or more) symptoms of inattention
(but fewer than six symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity) have persisted for at
least 6 months.
314.01 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Predominantly Hyper-
active-Impulsive Type. This subtype should be used if six (or more) symptoms
of hyperactivity-impulsivity (but fewer than six symptoms of inattention) have
persisted for at least 6 months. Inattention may often still be a significant clinical
feature in such cases.
Recording Procedures
Individuals who at an earlier stage of the disorder had the Predominantly Inattentive
Type or the Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive Type may go on to develop the
Combined Type and vice versa. The appropriate subtype (for a current diagnosis) should
be indicated based on the predominant symptom pattern for the past 6 months. If
clinically significant symptoms remain but criteria are no longer met for any of the
subtypes, the appropriate diagnosis is Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, In Partial
Remission. When an individual's symptoms do not currently meet full criteria for the
disorder and it is unclear whether criteria for the disorder have previously been met,
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Not Otherwise Specified should be diagnosed.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Associated features vary
depending on age and developmental stage and may include low frustration tolerance,
temper outbursts, bossiness, stubbornness, excessive and frequent insistence that
requests be met, mood lability, demoralization, dysphoria, rejection by peers, and poor
self-esteem. Academic achievement is often impaired and devalued, typically leading to
conflict with the family and school authorities. Inadequate self-application to tasks that
require sustained effort is often interpreted by others as indicating laziness, a poor sense
of responsibility, and oppositional behavior. Family relationships are often characterized
by resentment and antagonism, especially because variability in the individual's symp-Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
81
tomatic status often leads parents to believe that all the troublesome behavior is willful.
Individuals with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder may obtain less schooling than
their peers and have poorer vocational achievement. Intellectual development, as
assessed by individual IQ tests, appears to be somewhat lower in children with this
disorder. In its severe form, the disorder is very impairing, affecting social, familial, and
scholastic adjustment. A substantial proportion of children referred to clinics with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder also have Oppositional Defiant Disorder or
Conduct Disorder. There may be a higher prevalence of Mood Disorders, Anxiety
Disorders, Learning Disorders, and Communication Disorders in children with Atten-
tion-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. This disorder is not infrequent among individuals
with Tourette's Disorder; when the two disorders coexist, the onset of Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder often precedes the onset of the Tourette's Disorder. There may
be a history of child abuse or neglect, multiple foster placements, neurotoxin exposure
(e.g., lead poisoning), infections (e.g., encephalitis), drug exposure in utero, low birth
weight, and Mental Retardation.
Associated laboratory findings. There are no laboratory tests that have been estab-
lished as diagnostic in the clinical assessment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
Tests that require effortful mental processing have been noted to be abnormal in groups
of individuals with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder compared with control
subjects, but it is not yet entirely clear what fundamental cognitive deficit is responsible
for this.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
There are no specific physical features associated with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder, although minor physical anomalies (e.g., hypertelorism, highly arched palate,
low-set ears) may occur at a higher rate than in the general population. There may also
be a higher rate of physical injury.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is known to occur in various cultures, with
variations in reported prevalence among Western countries probably arising more from
different diagnostic practices than from differences in clinical presentation.
It is especially difficult to establish this diagnosis in children younger than age 4 or
5 years, because their characteristic behavior is much more variable than that of older
children and may include features that are similar to symptoms of Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder. Furthermore, symptoms of inattention in toddlers or preschool
children are often not readily observed because young children typically experience few
demands for sustained attention. However, even the attention of toddlers can be held
in a variety of situations (e.g., the average 2- or 3-year-old child can typically sit with
an adult looking through picture books). In contrast, young children with Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder move excessively and typically are difficult to contain.
Inquiring about a wide variety of behaviors in a young child may be helpful in ensuring
that a full clinical picture has been obtained. As children mature, symptoms usually
become less conspicuous. By late childhood and early adolescence, signs of excessive
gross motor activity (e.g., excessive running and climbing, not remaining seated) are
less common, and hyperactivity symptoms may be confined to fidgetiness or an inner82
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
feeling of jitteriness or restlessness. In school-age children, symptoms of inattention affect
classroom work and academic performance. Impulsive symptoms may also lead to the
breaking of familial, interpersonal, and educational rules, especially in adolescence. In
adulthood, restlessness may lead to difficulty in participating in sedentary activities and
to avoiding pastimes or occupations that provide limited opportunity for spontaneous
movement (e.g., desk jobs).
The disorder is much more frequent in males than in females, with male-to-female
ratios ranging from 4:1 to 9:1, depending on the setting (i.e., general population or
clinics).
Prevalence
The prevalence of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is estimated at 3%-5% in
school-age children. Data on prevalence in adolescence and adulthood are limited.
Course
Most parents first observe excessive motor activity when the children are toddlers,
frequently coinciding with the development of independent locomotion. However,
because many overactive toddlers will not go on to develop Attention-Deficit/Hyperac-
tivity Disorder, caution should be exercised in making this diagnosis in early years.
Usually, the disorder is first diagnosed during elementary school years, when school
adjustment is compromised. In the majority of cases seen in clinical settings, the disorder
is relatively stable through early adolescence. In most individuals, symptoms attenuate
during late adolescence and adulthood, although a minority experience the full
complement of symptoms of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder into mid-
adulthood. Other adults may retain only some of the symptoms, in which case the
diagnosis of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, In Partial Remission, should be
used. This diagnosis applies to individuals who no longer have the full disorder but still
retain some symptoms that cause functional impairment.
Familial Pattern
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder has been found to be more common in the
first-degree biological relatives of children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
Studies also suggest that there is a higher prevalence of Mood and Anxiety Disorders,
Learning Disorders, Substance-Related Disorders, and Antisocial Personality Disorder in
family members of individuals with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
In early childhood, it may be difficult to distinguish symptoms of Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder from age-appropriate behaviors in active children (e.g.,
running around or being noisy).
Symptoms of inattention are common among children with low IQ who are placed
in academic settings that are inappropriate to their intellectual ability. These behaviors
must be distinguished from similar signs in children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder. In children with Mental Retardation, an additional diagnosis of Attention-Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
83
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder should be made only if the symptoms of inattention or
hyperactivity are excessive for the child's mental age. Inattention in the classroom may
also occur when children with high intelligence are placed in academically un-
derstimulating environments. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder must also be
distinguished from difficulty in goal-directed behavior in children from inadequate,
disorganized, or chaotic environments. Reports from multiple informants (e.g., baby-
sitters, grandparents, or parents of playmates) are helpful in providing a confluence of
observations concerning the child's inattention, hyperactivity, and capacity for develop-
mentally appropriate self-regulation in various settings.
Individuals with oppositional behavior may resist work or school tasks that
require self-application because of an unwillingness to conform to others' demands.
These symptoms must be differentiated from the avoidance of school tasks seen in
individuals with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Complicating the differential
diagnosis is the fact that some individuals with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
develop secondary oppositional attitudes toward such tasks and devalue their impor-
tance, often as a rationalization for their failure.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms are better
accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., Mood Disorder, Anxiety Disorder,
Dissociative Disorder, Personality Disorder, Personality Change Due to a General
Medical Condition, or a Substance-Related Disorder). In all these disorders, the symptoms
of inattention typically have an onset after age 7 years, and the childhood history of
school adjustment generally is not characterized by disruptive behavior or teacher
complaints concerning inattentive, hyperactive, or impulsive behavior. When a Mood
Disorder or Anxiety Disorder co-occurs with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,
each should be diagnosed. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is not diagnosed if
the symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity occur exclusively during the course of a
Pervasive Developmental Disorder or a Psychotic Disorder. Symptoms of inatten-
tion, hyperactivity, or impulsivity related to the use of medication (e.g., bronchodilators,
isoniazid, akathisia from neuroleptics) in children before age 7 years are not diagnosed
as Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder but instead are diagnosed as Other Sub-
stance-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Diagnostic criteria for Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder
A. Either (1) or (2):
(1) six (or more) of the following symptoms of inattention have
persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is maladaptive and
inconsistent with developmental level:
Inattention
(a) often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless
mistakes in schoolwork, work, or other activities
(b) often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play
activities
(continued)84
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
D Diagnostic criteria for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (continued)
(c) often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly
(d) often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish
schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (not due to
oppositional behavior or failure to understand instructions)
(e) often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities
(0 often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that
require sustained mental effort (such as schoolwork or home-
work)
(g) often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., toys,
school assignments, pencils, books, or tools)
(h) is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli
(i) is often forgetful in daily activities
(2) six (or more) of the following symptoms of hyperactivity-
impulsivity have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that
is maladaptive and inconsistent with developmental level:
Hyperactivity
(a) often fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat
(b) often leaves seat in classroom or in other situations in which
remaining seated is expected
(c) often runs about or climbs excessively in situations in which
it is inappropriate (in adolescents or adults, may be limited to
subjective feelings of restlessness)
(d) often has difficulty playing or engaging in leisure activities
quietly
(e) is often "on the go" or often acts as if "driven by a motor"
(f) often talks excessively
Impulsivity
(g) often blurts out answers before questions have been com-
pleted
(h) often has difficulty awaiting turn
(i) often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conver-
sations or games)
B. Some hyperactive-impulsive or inattentive symptoms that caused im-
pairment were present before age 7 years.
C. Some impairment from the symptoms is present in two or more settings
(e.g., at school [or work] and at home).
D. There must be clear evidence of clinically significant impairment in
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
(continued)312.8 Conduct Disorder
85
D Diagnostic criteria for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (continued)
E. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of a Pervasive
Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, or other Psychotic Disorder
and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., Mood
Disorder, Anxiety Disorder, Dissociative Disorder, or a Personality
Disorder).
Code based on type:
314.01 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Combined Type:
if both Criteria Al and A2 are met for the past 6 months
314.00 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Predominantly
Inattentive Type: if Criterion Al is met but Criterion A2 is not met for
the past 6 months
314.01 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Predominantly
Hyperactive-Impulsive Type: if Criterion A2 is met but Criterion Al is
not met for the past 6 months
Coding note: For individuals (especially adolescents and adults) who currently
have symptoms that no longer meet full criteria, "In Partial Remission" should be
specified.
314.9 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders with prominent symptoms of inattention or hyperactivity-
impulsivity that do not meet criteria for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
312.8 Conduct Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Conduct Disorder is a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior
in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are
violated (Criterion A). These behaviors fall into four main groupings: aggressive conduct
that causes or threatens physical harm to other people or animals (Criteria A1-A7),
nonaggressive conduct that causes property loss or damage (Criteria A8—A9), deceitful-
ness or theft (Criteria A10-A12), and serious violations of rules (Criteria A13-A15). Three
(or more) characteristic behaviors must have been present during the past 12 months,
with at least one behavior present in the past 6 months. The disturbance in behavior
causes clinically significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning
(Criterion B). Conduct Disorder may be diagnosed in individuals who are older than
age 18 years, but only if the criteria for Antisocial Personality Disorder are not met
(Criterion C). The behavior pattern is usually present in a variety of settings such as
home, school, or the community. Because individuals with Conduct Disorder are likely86
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
to minimize their conduct problems, the clinician often must rely on additional
informants. However, the informant's knowledge of the child's conduct problems may
be limited by inadequate supervision or by the child's not having revealed them.
Children or adolescents with this disorder often initiate aggressive behavior and
react aggressively to others. They may display bullying, threatening, or intimidating
behavior (Criterion Al); initiate frequent physical fights (Criterion A2); use a weapon
that can cause serious physical harm (e.g., a bat, brick, broken bottle, knife, or gun)
(Criterion A3); be physically cruel to people (Criterion A4) or animals (Criterion A5);
steal while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching, extortion, or armed
robbery) (Criterion A6); or force someone into sexual activity (Criterion A7). Physical
violence may take the form of rape, assault, or in rare cases, homicide.
Deliberate destruction of others' property is a characteristic feature of this disorder
and may include deliberate fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage
(Criterion A8) or deliberately destroying other people's property in other ways (e.g.,
smashing car windows, school vandalism) (Criterion A9).
Deceitfulness or theft is common and may include breaking into someone else's
house, building, or car (Criterion A10); frequently lying or breaking promises to obtain
goods or favors or to avoid debts or obligations (e.g., "conning" other people) (Criterion
Al 1); or stealing items of nontrivial value without confronting the victim (e.g., shoplifting,
forgery) (Criterion A12).
Characteristically, there are also serious violations of rules (e.g., school, parental)
by individuals with this disorder. Children with this disorder often have a pattern,
beginning before age 13 years, of staying out late at night despite parental prohibitions
(Criterion A13). There may be a pattern of running away from home overnight (Criterion
A14). To be considered a symptom of Conduct Disorder, the running away must have
occurred at least twice (or only once if the individual did not return for a lengthy period).
Runaway episodes that occur as a direct consequence of physical or sexual abuse do
not typically qualify for this criterion. Children with this disorder may often be truant
from school, beginning prior to age 13 years (Criterion A15). In older individuals, this
behavior is manifested by often being absent from work without good reason.
Subtypes
Two subtypes of Conduct Disorder are provided based on the age at onset of the disorder
(i.e., Childhood-Onset Type and Adolescent-Onset Type). The subtypes differ in regard
to the characteristic nature of the presenting conduct problems, developmental course
and prognosis, and gender ratio. Both subtypes can occur in a mild, moderate, or severe
form. In assessing the age at onset, information should preferably be obtained from the
youth and from caregiver(s). Because many of the behaviors may be concealed,
caregivers may underreport symptoms and overestimate the age at onset.
Childhood-Onset Type. This subtype is defined by the onset of at least one
criterion characteristic of Conduct Disorder prior to age 10 years. Individuals with
Childhood-Onset Type are usually male, frequently display physical aggression
toward others, have disturbed peer relationships, may have had Oppositional
Defiant Disorder during early childhood, and usually have symptoms that meet
full criteria for Conduct Disorder prior to puberty. These individuals are more
likely to have persistent Conduct Disorder and to develop adult Antisocial
Personality Disorder than are those with Adolescent-Onset Type.312.8 Conduct Disorder
87
Adolescent-Onset Type. This subtype is defined by the absence of any criteria
characteristic of Conduct Disorder prior to age 10 years. Compared with those
with the Childhood-Onset Type, these individuals are less likely to display
aggressive behaviors and tend to have more normative peer relationships
(although they often display conduct problems in the company of others). These
individuals are less likely to have persistent Conduct Disorder or to develop adult
Antisocial Personality Disorder. The ratio of males to females with Conduct
Disorder is lower for the Adolescent-Onset Type than for the Childhood-Onset
Type.
Severity Specifiers
Mild. Few if any conduct problems in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis are present, and conduct problems cause relatively minor harm to
others (e.g., lying, truancy, staying out after dark without permission).
Moderate. The number of conduct problems and the effect on others are
intermediate between "mild" and "severe" (e.g., stealing without confronting a victim,
vandalism).
Severe. Many conduct problems in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis are present, or conduct problems cause considerable harm to others
(e.g., forced sex, physical cruelty, use of a weapon, stealing while confronting a
victim, breaking and entering).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with Conduct
Disorder may have little empathy and little concern for the feelings, wishes, and
well-being of others. Especially in ambiguous situations, aggressive individuals with this
disorder frequently misperceive the intentions of others as more hostile and threatening
than is the case and respond with aggression that they then feel is reasonable and
justified. They may be callous and lack appropriate feelings of guilt or remorse. It can
be difficult to evaluate whether displayed remorse is genuine because these individuals
learn that expressing guilt may reduce or prevent punishment. Individuals with this
disorder may readily inform on their companions and try to blame others for their own
misdeeds. Self-esteem is usually low, although the person may project an image of
"toughness." Poor frustration tolerance, irritability, temper outbursts, and recklessness
are frequent associated features. Accident rates appear to be higher in individuals with
Conduct Disorder than in those without it.
Conduct Disorder is often associated with an early onset of sexual behavior,
drinking, smoking, use of illegal substances, and reckless and risk-taking acts. Illegal
drug use may increase the risk that Conduct Disorder will persist. Conduct Disorder
behaviors may lead to school suspension or expulsion, problems in work adjustment,
legal difficulties, sexually transmitted diseases, unplanned pregnancy, and physical injury
from accidents or fights. These problems may preclude attendance in ordinary schools
or living in a parental or foster home. Suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and completed
suicide occur at a higher than expected rate. Conduct Disorder may be associated with
lower than average intelligence. Academic achievement, particularly in reading and other
verbal skills, is often below the level expected on the basis of age and intelligence and
may justify the additional diagnosis of a Learning or Communication Disorder. Attention-88
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is common in children with Conduct Disorder. Conduct
Disorder may also be associated with one or more of the following mental disorders:
Learning Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, Mood Disorders, and Substance-Related Disor-
ders. The following factors may predispose the individual to the development of Conduc
Disorder: parental rejection and neglect, difficult infant temperament, inconsistent
child-rearing practices with harsh discipline, physical or sexual abuse, lack of supervi-
sion, early institutional living, frequent changes of caregivers, large family size, associ-
ation with a delinquent peer group, and certain kinds of familial psychopathology.
Associated laboratory findings. In some studies, lower heart rate and lower skin
conductance have been noted in individuals with Conduct Disorder compared with those
without the disorder. However, levels of physiological arousal are not diagnostic of the
disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Concerns have been raised that the Conduct Disorder diagnosis may at times be
misapplied to individuals in settings where patterns of undesirable behavior are
sometimes viewed as protective (e.g., threatening, impoverished, high-crime). Consistent
with the DSM-IV definition of mental disorder, the Conduct Disorder diagnosis should
be applied only when the behavior in question is symptomatic of an underlying
dysfunction within the individual and not simply a reaction to the immediate social
context. Moreover, immigrant youth from war-ravaged countries who have a history of
aggressive behaviors that may have been necessary for their survival in that context
would not necessarily warrant a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder. It may be helpful for
the clinician to consider the social and economic context in which the undesirable
behaviors have occurred.
Symptoms of the disorder vary with age as the individual develops increased physical
strength, cognitive abilities, and sexual maturity. Less severe behaviors (e.g., lying,
shoplifting, physical fighting) tend to emerge first, whereas others (e.g., burglary) tend
to emerge later. Typically, the most severe conduct problems (e.g., rape, theft while
confronting a victim) tend to emerge last. However, there are wide differences among
individuals, with some engaging in the more damaging behaviors at an early age.
Conduct Disorder, especially the Childhood-Onset Type, is much more common in
males. Gender differences are also found in specific types of conduct problems. Males
with a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder frequently exhibit fighting, stealing, vandalism,
and school discipline problems. Females with a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder are more
likely to exhibit lying, truancy, running away, substance use, and prostitution. Whereas
confrontational aggression is more often displayed by males, females tend to use more
nonconfrontational behaviors.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Conduct Disorder appears to have increased over the last decades
and may be higher in urban than in rural settings. Rates vary widely depending on the
nature of the population sampled and methods of ascertainment: for males under age
18 years, rates range from 6% to 16%; for females, rates range from 2% to 9%. Conduct
Disorder is one of the most frequently diagnosed conditions in outpatient and inpatient
mental health facilities for children.312.8 Conduct Disorder
89
Course
The onset of Conduct Disorder may occur as early as age 5-6 years but is usually in late
childhood or early adolescence. Onset is rare after age 16 years. The course of Conduct
Disorder is variable. In a majority of individuals, the disorder remits by adulthood.
However, a substantial proportion continue to show behaviors in adulthood that meet
criteria for Antisocial Personality Disorder. Many individuals with Conduct Disorder,
particularly those with Adolescent-Onset Type and those with few and milder symptoms,
achieve adequate social and occupational adjustment as adults. Early onset predicts a
worse prognosis and an increased risk in adult life for Antisocial Personality Disorder
and Substance-Related Disorders. Individuals with Conduct Disorder are at risk for later
Mood or Anxiety Disorders, Somatoform Disorders, and Substance-Related Disorders.
Familial Pattern
Estimates from twin and adoption studies show that Conduct Disorder has both genetic
and environmental components. The risk for Conduct Disorder is increased in children
with a biological or adoptive parent with Antisocial Personality Disorder or a sibling
with Conduct Disorder. The disorder also appears to be more common in children of
biological parents with Alcohol Dependence, Mood Disorders, or Schizophrenia or
biological parents who have a history of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder or
Conduct Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
Although Oppositional Defiant Disorder includes some of the features observed in
Conduct Disorder (e.g., disobedience and opposition to authority figures), it does not
include the persistent pattern of the more serious forms of behavior in which either the
basic rights of others or age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated. When the
individual's pattern of behavior meets the criteria for both Conduct Disorder and
Oppositional Defiant Disorder, the diagnosis of Conduct Disorder takes precedence and
Oppositional Defiant Disorder is not diagnosed.
Although children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder often exhibit
hyperactive and impulsive behavior that may be disruptive, this behavior does not by
itself violate age-appropriate societal norms and therefore does not usually meet criteria
for Conduct Disorder. When criteria are met for both Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder and Conduct Disorder, both diagnoses should be given.
Irritability and conduct problems often occur in children or adolescents having a
Manic Episode. These can usually be distinguished from the pattern of conduct
problems seen in Conduct Disorder based on the episodic course and accompanying
symptoms characteristic of a Manic Episode. If criteria for both are met, diagnoses of
both Conduct Disorder and Bipolar I Disorder can be given.
The diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder (With Disturbance of Conduct or With
Mixed Disturbance of Emotions and Conduct) should be considered if clinically
significant conduct problems that do not meet the criteria for another specific disorder
develop in clear association with the onset of a psychosocial stressor. Isolated conduct
problems that do not meet criteria for Conduct Disorder or Adjustment Disorder may be
coded as Child or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior (see "Other Conditions That May
Be a Focus of Clinical Attention," p. 684). Conduct Disorder is diagnosed only if the90
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
conduct problems represent a repetitive and persistent pattern that is associated with
impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
For individuals over age 18 years, a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder can be given
only if the criteria are not also met for Antisocial Personality Disorder. The diagnosis
of Antisocial Personality Disorder cannot be given to individuals under age 18 years.
Diagnostic criteria for 312.8 Conduct Disorder
A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights
of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated,
as manifested by the presence of three (or more) of the following criteria
in the past 12 months, with at least one criterion present in the past
6 months:
Aggression to people and animals
(1) often bullies, threatens, or intimidates others
(2) often initiates physical fights
(3) has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to others
(e.g., a bat, brick, broken bottle, knife, gun)
(4) has been physically cruel to people
(5) has been physically cruel to animals
(6) has stolen while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse
snatching, extortion, armed robbery)
(7) has forced someone into sexual activity
Destruction of property
(8) has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of causing
serious damage
(9) has deliberately destroyed others' property (other than by fire
setting)
Deceitfulness or theft
(10) has broken into someone else's house, building, or car
(11) often lies to obtain goods or favors or to avoid obligations (i.e.,
"cons" others)
(12) has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a victim
(e.g., shoplifting, but without breaking and entering; forgery)
Serious violations of rules
(13)
often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions, beginning
before age 13 years
(14) has run away from home overnight at least twice while living in
parental or parental surrogate home (or once without returning
for a lengthy period)
(15) is often truant from school, beginning before age 13 years
(continued)313.81 Oppositional Defiant Disorder
91
D Diagnostic criteria for 312.8 Conduct Disorder (continued)
B. The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment in
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
C. If the individual is age 18 years or older, criteria are not met for Antisocial
Personality Disorder.
Specify type based on age at onset:
Childhood-Onset Type: onset of at least one criterion characteristic of
Conduct Disorder prior to age 10 years
Adolescent-Onset Type: absence of any criteria characteristic of Conduct
Disorder prior to age 10 years
Specify severity:
Mild: few if any conduct problems in excess of those required to make
the diagnosis and conduct problems cause only minor harm to others
Moderate: number of conduct problems and effect on others intermediate
between "mild" and "severe"
Severe: many conduct problems in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis or conduct problems cause considerable harm to others
313.81
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Oppositional Defiant Disorder is a recurrent pattern of
negativistic, defiant, disobedient, and hostile behavior toward authority figures that
persists for at least 6 months (Criterion A) and is characterized by the frequent occurrenc
of at least four of the following behaviors: losing temper (Criterion Al), arguing with
adults (Criterion A2), actively defying or refusing to comply with the requests or rules
of adults (Criterion A3), deliberately doing things that will annoy other people (Criterion
A4), blaming others for his or her own mistakes or misbehavior (Criterion A5), being
touchy or easily annoyed by others (Criterion A6), being angry and resentful (Criterion
A7), or being spiteful or vindictive (Criterion A8). To qualify for Oppositional Defiant
Disorder, the behaviors must occur more frequently than is typically observed in
individuals of comparable age and developmental level and must lead to significant
impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning (Criterion B). The diagnosis
is not made if the disturbance in behavior occurs exclusively during the course of a
Psychotic or Mood Disorder (Criterion C) or if criteria are met for Conduct Disorder or
Antisocial Personality Disorder (in an individual over age 18 years).
Negativistic and defiant behaviors are expressed by persistent stubbornness, resis-
tance to directions, and unwillingness to compromise, give in, or negotiate with adults
or peers. Defiance may also include deliberate or persistent testing of limits, usually by
ignoring orders, arguing, and failing to accept blame for misdeeds. Hostility can be
directed at adults or peers and is shown by deliberately annoying others or by verbal92
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
aggression (usually without the more serious physical aggression seen in Conduct
Disorder). Manifestations of the disorder are almost invariably present in the home
setting, but may not be evident at school or in the community. Symptoms of the disorder
are typically more evident in interactions with adults or peers whom the individual knows
well, and thus may not be apparent during clinical examination. Usually individuals with
this disorder do not regard themselves as oppositional or defiant, but justify their
behavior as a response to unreasonable demands or circumstances.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated features and disorders vary as a function of the individual's age and the
severity of the Oppositional Defiant Disorder. In males, the disorder has been shown to
be more prevalent among those who, in the preschool years, have problematic
temperaments (e.g., high reactivity, difficulty being soothed) or high motor activity.
During the school years, there may be low self-esteem, mood lability, low frustration
tolerance, swearing, and the precocious use of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs. There
are often conflicts with parents, teachers, and peers. There may be a vicious cycle in
which the parent and child bring out the worst in each other. Oppositional Defiant
Disorder is more prevalent in families in which child care is disrupted by a succession
of different caregivers or in families in which harsh, inconsistent, or neglectful child-
rearing practices are common. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is common in
children with Oppositional Defiant Disorder. Learning Disorders and Communication
Disorders also tend to be associated with Oppositional Defiant Disorder.
Specific Age and Gender Features
Because transient oppositional behavior is very common in preschool children and in
adolescents, caution should be exercised in making the diagnosis of Oppositional Defiant
Disorder especially during these developmental periods. The number of oppositional
symptoms tends to increase with age. The disorder is more prevalent in males than in
females before puberty, but the rates are probably equal after puberty. Symptoms are
generally similar in each gender, except that males may have more confrontational
behavior and more persistent symptoms.
Prevalence
Rates of Oppositional Defiant Disorder from 2% to 16% have been reported, depending
on the nature of the population sample and methods of ascertainment.
Course
Oppositional Defiant Disorder usually becomes evident before age 8 years and usually
not later than early adolescence. The oppositional symptoms often emerge in the home
setting but over time may appear in other settings as well. Onset is typically gradual,
usually occurring over the course of months or years. In a significant proportion of cases,
Oppositional Defiant Disorder is a developmental antecedent to Conduct Disorder.313.81 Oppositional Defiant Disorder
93
Familial Pattern
Oppositional Defiant Disorder appears to be more common in families in which at least
one parent has a history of a Mood Disorder, Oppositional Defiant Disorder, Conduct
Disorder, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Antisocial Personality Disorder, or a
Substance-Related Disorder. In addition, some studies suggest that mothers with a
Depressive Disorder are more likely to have children with Oppositional behavior, but it
is unclear to what extent maternal depression results from or causes Oppositional
behavior in children. Oppositional Defiant Disorder is more common in families in which
there is serious marital discord.
Differential Diagnosis
The disruptive behaviors of individuals with Oppositional Defiant Disorder are of a less
severe nature than those of individuals with Conduct Disorder and typically do not
include aggression toward people or animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of
theft or deceit. Because all of the features of Oppositional Defiant Disorder are usually
present in Conduct Disorder, Oppositional Defiant Disorder is not diagnosed if the
criteria are met for Conduct Disorder. Oppositional behavior is a common associated
feature of Mood Disorders and Psychotic Disorders presenting in children and
adolescents and should not be diagnosed separately if the symptoms occur exclusively
during the course of a Mood or Psychotic Disorder. Oppositional behaviors must also
be distinguished from the disruptive behavior resulting from inattention and impulsivity
in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. When the two disorders co-occur, both
diagnoses should be made. In individuals with Mental Retardation, a diagnosis of
Oppositional Defiant Disorder is given only if the Oppositional behavior is markedly
greater than is commonly observed among individuals of comparable age, gender, and
severity of Mental Retardation. Oppositional Defiant Disorder must also be distinguished
from a failure to follow directions that is the result of impaired language comprehen-
sion (e.g., hearing loss, Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder). Oppositional
behavior is a typical feature of certain developmental stages (e.g., early childhood
and adolescence). A diagnosis of Oppositional Defiant Disorder should be considered
only if the behaviors occur more frequently and have more serious consequences than
is typically observed in other individuals of comparable developmental stage and lead
to significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning. New onset
of Oppositional behaviors in adolescence may be due to the process of normal
individuation.
Diagnostic criteria for 313.81 Oppositional Defiant
Disorder
A. A pattern of negativistic, hostile, and defiant behavior lasting at least
6 months, during which four (or more) of the following are present:
(1) often loses temper
(2) often argues with adults
(continued)94
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
D Diagnostic criteria for 313.81 Oppositional Defiant
Disorder (continued)
(3) often actively defies or refuses to comply with adults' requests or
rules
(4) often deliberately annoys people
(5) often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior
(6) is often touchy or easily annoyed by others
(7) is often angry and resentful
(8) is often spiteful or vindictive
Note: Consider a criterion met only if the behavior occurs more frequently
than is typically observed in individuals of comparable age and developmental
level.
B. The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment in
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
C. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during the course of a Psychotic
or Mood Disorder.
D. Criteria are not met for Conduct Disorder, and, if the individual is age
18 years or older, criteria are not met for Antisocial Personality Disorder.
312.9 Disruptive Behavior Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders characterized by conduct or oppositional defiant behaviors
that do not meet the criteria for Conduct Disorder or Oppositional Defiant Disorder. For
example, include clinical presentations that do not meet full criteria either for Opposi-
tional Defiant Disorder or Conduct Disorder, but in which there is clinically significant
impairment.
Feeding and Eating Disorders of
Infancy or Early Childhood
The Feeding and Eating Disorders of Infancy or Early Childhood are characterized by
persistent feeding and eating disturbances. The specific disorders included are Pica,
Rumination Disorder, and Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood. Note that
Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa are included in the "Eating Disorders" section
(see p. 539).307.52 Pica
95
307.52 Pica
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Pica is the persistent eating of nonnutritive substances for a
period of at least 1 month (Criterion A). The typical substance ingested tends to vary
with age. Infants and younger children typically eat paint, plaster, string, hair, or cloth.
Older children may eat animal droppings, sand, insects, leaves, or pebbles. Adolescents
and adults may consume clay or soil. There is no aversion to food. This behavior must
be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B) and not part of a culturally sanctioned
practice (Criterion C). The eating of nonnutritive substances is an associated feature of
other mental disorders (e.g., Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Mental Retardation). I
the eating behavior occurs exclusively during the course of another mental disorder, a
separate diagnosis of Pica should be made only if the eating behavior is sufficiently
severe to warrant independent clinical attention (Criterion D).
Associated Features and Disorders
Pica is frequently associated with Mental Retardation. Although vitamin or mineral
deficiencies have been reported in some instances, usually no specific biological
abnormalities are found. In some cases, Pica comes to clinical attention only when the
individual presents with any of the various general medical complications that may result
(e.g., lead poisoning as a result of ingesting paint or paint-soaked plaster, mechanical
bowel problems, intestinal obstruction as a result of hair ball tumors, intestinal
perforation, or infections such as toxoplasmosis and toxocariasis as a result of ingesting
feces or dirt). Poverty, neglect, lack of parental supervision, and developmental delay
increase the risk for the condition.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
In some cultures, the eating of dirt or other seemingly nonnutritive substances is believed
to be of value. Pica is more commonly seen in young children and occasionally in
pregnant females.
Prevalence
Epidemiological data on Pica are limited. The condition is not often diagnosed but may
not be uncommon in preschool children. Among individuals with Mental Retardatio
the prevalence of the disorder appears to increase with the severity of the retardation.
Course
Pica may have its onset in infancy. In most instances, the disorder probably lasts for
several months and then remits. It may occasionally continue into adolescence or, less
frequently, into adulthood. In individuals with Mental Retardation, the behavior may
diminish during adulthood.96
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Differential
Diagnosis
Before approximately ages 18-24 months, mouthing and sometimes eating of nonnutri-
tive substances are relatively common and do not imply the presence of Pica. Pica is
diagnosed only when the behavior is judged to be persistent (i.e., present for at least 1
month) and inappropriate given the individual's developmental level. Eating of non-
nutritive substances may occur during the course of other mental disorders (e.g., in a
Pervasive Developmental Disorder, in Schizophrenia as a result of delusional
beliefs, and in Kleine-Levin syndrome). In such instances, an additional diagnosis of
Pica should be given only if the eating behavior is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention. Pica can be distinguished from other eating disorders
(e.g., Rumination Disorder, Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood, Anorexia
Nervosa, and Bulimia Nervosa) by the consumption of nonnutritive substances.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.52 Pica
A. Persistent eating of nonnutritive substances for a period of at least
1 month.
B. The eating of nonnutritive substances is inappropriate to the develop-
mental level.
C. The eating behavior is not part of a culturally sanctioned practice.
D. If the eating behavior occurs exclusively during the course of another
mental disorder (e.g., Mental Retardation, Pervasive Developmental
Disorder, Schizophrenia), it is sufficiently severe to warrant independent
clinical attention.
307.53 Rumination Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Rumination Disorder is the repeated regurgitation and rechewing
of food that develops in an infant or child after a period of normal functioning and lasts
for at least 1 month (Criterion A). Partially digested food is brought up into the mouth
without apparent nausea, retching, disgust, or associated gastrointestinal disorder. The
food is then either ejected from the mouth or, more frequently, chewed and reswallowed.
The symptoms are not due to an associated gastrointestinal or other general medical
condition (e.g., Sandifer's syndrome, esophageal reflux) (Criterion B) and do not occur
exclusively during the course of Anorexia Nervosa or Bulimia Nervosa. If the symptoms
occur exclusively during the course of Mental Retardation or a Pervasive Developmental
Disorder, they must be sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention307.53 Rumination Disorder
97
(Criterion C). The disorder is most commonly observed in infants but may be seen in
older individuals, particularly those who also have Mental Retardation. Infants with the
disorder display a characteristic position of straining and arching the back with the head
held back, make sucking movements with their tongues, and give the impression of
gaining satisfaction from the activity.
Associated Features and Disorders
Infants with Rumination Disorder are generally irritable and hungry between
episodes of regurgitation. Although the infant is apparently hungry and ingests large
amounts of food, malnutrition may occur because regurgitation immediately follows
the feedings. Weight loss, failure to make expected weight gains, and even death
can result (with mortality rates as high as 25% reported). Malnutrition appears to be
less likely in older children and adults in whom the disorder may be either continuous
or episodic. Psychosocial problems such as lack of stimulation, neglect, stressful life
situations, and problems in the parent-child relationship may be predisposing factors.
Understimulation of the infant may result if the caregiver becomes discouraged and
alienated because of the unsuccessful feeding experiences or the noxious odor of
the regurgitated material. In some instances, Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early
Childhood may also develop. In older children and adults, Mental Retardation is a
predisposing factor.
Prevalence
Rumination Disorder appears to be uncommon. It may occur more often in males than
in females.
Course
The onset of Rumination Disorder may occur in the context of developmental delays.
The age at onset is between ages 3 and 12 months, except in individuals with Mental
Retardation in whom the disorder may occur at a somewhat later developmental stage.
In infants, the disorder frequently remits spontaneously. In some severe cases, however,
the course is continuous.
Differential
Diagnosis
In infants, congenital anomalies (e.g., pyloric stenosis or gastroesophageal reflux) or
other general medical conditions (e.g., infections of the gastrointestinal system) can
cause regurgitation of food and should be ruled out by appropriate physical examina-
tions and laboratory tests. Rumination can be distinguished from normal vomiting of
early infancy by the apparently voluntary nature of the rumination (e.g., observation
of characteristic preparatory movements followed by regurgitation and sucking or
chewing movements that appear to be pleasurable). Rumination Disorder is not
diagnosed if the symptoms occur exclusively during the course of Anorexia Nervosa
or Bulimia Nervosa.98
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Diagnostic criteria for 307.53 Rumination Disorder
A. Repeated regurgitation and rechewing of food for a period of at least
1 month following a period of normal functioning.
B. The behavior is not due to an associated gastrointestinal or other general
medical condition (e.g., esophageal reflux).
C. The behavior does not occur exclusively during the course of Anorexia
Nervosa or Bulimia Nervosa. If the symptoms occur exclusively during
the course of Mental Retardation or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder,
they are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
307.59 Feeding Disorder of
Infancy or Early Childhood
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood is the persistent
failure to eat adequately, as reflected in significant failure to gain weight or significant
weight loss over at least 1 month (Criterion A). There is no gastrointestinal or other
general medical condition (e.g., esophageal reflux) severe enough to account for the
feeding disturbance (Criterion B). The feeding disturbance is also not better accounted
for by another Mental Disorder (e.g., Rumination Disorder) or by lack of available food
(Criterion C). The onset of the disorder must be before age 6 years (Criterion D).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Infants with feeding disor-
ders are often especially irritable and difficult to console during feeding. They may
appear apathetic and withdrawn and may also exhibit developmental delays. In some
instances, parent-child interaction problems may contribute to or exacerbate the infant's
feeding problem (e.g., presenting food inappropriately or responding to the infant's food
refusal as if it were an act of aggression or rejection). Inadequate caloric intake may
exacerbate the associated features (e.g., irritability, developmental lags) and further
contribute to feeding difficulties. Factors in the infant that may be associated with the
condition include neuroregulatory difficulties (e.g., sleep-wake difficulties, frequent
regurgitation, unpredictable periods of alertness) and preexisting developmental im-
pairments that make the infant less responsive. Other factors that may be associated with
the condition include parental psychopathology and child abuse or neglect.
Associated laboratory findings. There may be nonspecific findings associated with
the malnutrition that is sometimes seen with Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early
Childhood (e.g., anemia and low serum albumin and total protein).307.59 Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood
99
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
There may be malnutrition that, in severe cases, can be life threatening in Feeding
Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood.
Specific Age and Gender Features
A later onset (e.g., age 2 or 3 years rather than infancy) is associated with lesser degrees
of developmental delay and malnutrition, although growth retardation may be observed.
Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood is equally common in males and females.
Prevalence
Of all pediatric hospital admissions, l%-5% are for failure to gain adequate weight, and
up to one-half of these may reflect feeding disturbances without any apparent predis-
posing general medical condition.
Course
Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood commonly has its onset in the first year
of life, but may have an onset in children ages 2-3 years. The majority of children have
improved growth after variable lengths of time.
Differential Diagnosis
Minor problems in feeding are common in infancy. The diagnosis of Feeding Disorder
of Infancy or Early Childhood should be made only if the eating problem results in
significant failure to gain weight or loss of weight.
This disorder is not diagnosed if the feeding disturbances are fully explained by a
gastrointestinal, endocrinological, or neurological condition. Children with an
underlying general medical condition may be more difficult to feed, and the diagnosis
of Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood should not be made in such cases
unless the degree of disturbance is of greater severity than would be expected on the
basis of the general medical condition alone. The diagnosis is suggested if there is
improvement in feeding and weight gain in response to changing caregivers.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.59 Feeding Disorder of
Infancy or Early Childhood
A. Feeding disturbance as manifested by persistent failure to eat adequately
with significant failure to gain weight or significant loss of weight over
at least 1 month.
B. The disturbance is not due to an associated gastrointestinal or other
general medical condition (e.g., esophageal reflux).
(continued)100
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
D Diagnostic criteria for 307.59 Feeding Disorder of Infancy
or Early Childhood (continued)
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., Rumination Disorder) or by lack of available food.
D. The onset is before age 6 years.
Tic Disorders
Four disorders are included in this section: Tourette's Disorder, Chronic Motor or Vocal
Tic Disorder, Transient Tic Disorder, and Tic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. A tic is
a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, stereotyped motor movement or vocalization.
It is experienced as irresistible but can be suppressed for varying lengths of time. All
forms of tic may be exacerbated by stress and attenuated during absorbing activities
(e.g., reading or sewing). Tics are usually markedly diminished during sleep. Both motor
and vocal tics may be classified as either simple or complex, although the boundary is
not well defined. Common simple motor tics include eye blinking, neck jerking, shoulder
shrugging, facial grimacing, and coughing. Common simple vocal tics include throat
clearing, grunting, sniffing, snorting, and barking. Common complex motor tics include
facial gestures, grooming behaviors, jumping, touching, stamping, and smelling an
object. Common complex vocal tics include repeating words or phrases out of context,
coprolalia (use of socially unacceptable words, frequently obscene), palilalia (repeating
one's own sounds or words), and echolalia (repeating the last-heard sound, word, or
phrase). Other complex tics include echokinesis (imitation of someone else's move-
ments).
Differential
Diagnosis
Tic Disorders must be distinguished from other types of abnormal movements that
may accompany general medical conditions (e.g., Huntington's disease, stroke,
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Wilson's disease, Sydenham's chorea, multiple sclerosis, post-
viral encephalitis, head injury) or may be due to the direct effects of a substance (e.g.,
a neuroleptic medication). Choreiform movements are dancing, random, irregular,
nonrepetitive movements. Dystonic movements are slower, twisting movements
interspersed with prolonged states of muscular tension. Athetoid movements are slow,
irregular, writhing movements, most frequently in the fingers and toes, but often
involving the face and neck. Myoclonic movements are brief, shocklike muscle
contractions that may affect parts of muscles or muscle groups but not synergistically.
Hemiballismic movements are intermittent, coarse, large-amplitude, unilateral move-
ments of the limbs. Spasms are stereotypic, slower, and more prolonged than tics and
involve groups of muscles. Hemifacial spasm consists of irregular, repetitive, unilateral
jerks of facial muscles. Synkinesis involves an involuntary movement accompanying a
voluntary one (e.g., movement of the corner of the mouth when the person intends to307.23 Tourette's Disorder
101
close the eye). This differentiation is further facilitated by considering the presence of
features of the underlying general medical condition (e.g., characteristic family history
in Huntington's disease) or a history of medication use.
When the tics are a direct physiological consequence of medication use, a
Medication-Induced Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified would be
diagnosed instead of a Tic Disorder. In some cases, certain medications (e.g., methyl-
phenidate) may exacerbate a preexisting Tic Disorder, in which case no additional
diagnosis of a medication-induced disorder is necessary.
Tics must also be distinguished from stereotyped movements seen in Stereotypic
Movement Disorder and Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Differentiating sim
ple tics (e.g., eye blinking) from the complex movements characteristic of stereotyped
movements is relatively straightforward. The distinction between complex motor tics
and stereotyped movements is less clear-cut. In general, stereotyped movements appear
to be more driven and intentional, whereas tics have a more involuntary quality and are
not rhythmic. Tics must be distinguished from compulsions (as in Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder). Compulsions are typically quite complex and are performed in response to
an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly. In contrast to a
compulsion, tics are typically less complex and are not aimed at neutralizing the anxiety
resulting from an obsession. Some individuals manifest symptoms of both Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder and a Tic Disorder (especially Tourette's Disorder), so that both
diagnoses may be warranted. Certain vocal or motor tics (e.g., barking, echolalia,
palilalia) must be distinguished from disorganized or catatonic behavior in Schizophrenia.
The Tic Disorders can be distinguished from one another based on duration and
variety of tics and age at onset. Transient Tic Disorder includes motor and/or vocal
tics lasting for at least 4 weeks but for no longer than 12 consecutive months. Tourette's
Disorder and Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder each have a duration of more
than 12 months but are distinguished by the requirement for Tourette's Disorder that
there be multiple motor tics and at least one vocal tic. Tic Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified would be appropriate for clinically significant presentations lasting less than
4 weeks, for presentations with an age at onset above age 18 years, and for the unusual
case of an individual "with only one motor tic and only one vocal tic.
307.23 Tourette's Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Tourette's Disorder are multiple motor tics and one or more
vocal tics (Criterion A). These may appear simultaneously or at different periods during
the illness. The tics occur many times a day, recurrently throughout a period of more
than 1 year (Criterion B). During this period, there is never a tic-free period of more
than 3 consecutive months. The disturbance causes marked distress or significant
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
C). The onset of the disorder is before age 18 years (Criterion D). The tics are not due
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., stimulants) or a general medical
condition (e.g., Huntington's disease or postviral encephalitis) (Criterion E).
The anatomical location, number, frequency, complexity, and severity of the tics
change over time. The tics typically involve the head and, frequently, other parts of the
body, such as the torso and upper and lower limbs. The vocal tics include various words102
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
or sounds such as clicks, grunts, yelps, barks, sniffs, snorts, and coughs. Coprolalia, a
complex vocal tic involving the uttering of obscenities, is present in a few individuals
(less than 10%) with this disorder. Complex motor tics involving touching, squattin
deep knee bends, retracing steps, and twirling when walking may be present. In
approximately one-half the individuals with this disorder, the first symptoms to appear
are bouts of a single tic, most frequently eye blinking, less frequently tics involving
another part of the face or the body. Initial symptoms can also include tongue protrusion,
squatting, sniffing, hopping, skipping, throat clearing, stuttering, uttering sounds or
words, and coprolalia. The other cases begin with multiple symptoms.
Associated Features and Disorders
The most common associated symptoms of Tourette's Disorder are obsessions and
compulsions. Hyperactivity, distractibility, and impulsivity are also relatively common.
Social discomfort, shame, self-consciousness, and depressed mood frequently occur.
Social, academic, and occupational functioning may be impaired because of rejection
by others or anxiety about having tics in social situations. In severe cases of Tourette's
Disorder, the tics may directly interfere with daily activities (e.g., reading or writing).
Rare complications of Tourette's Disorder include physical injury, such as blindness due
to retinal detachment (from head banging or striking oneself), orthopedic problems
(from knee bending, neck jerking, or head turning), and skin problems (from picking).
The severity of the tics may be exacerbated by administration of central nervous system
stimulants, which may be a dose-related phenomenon. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder,
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, and Learning Disorders may be associated with
Tourette's Disorder.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Tourette's Disorder has been widely reported in diverse racial and ethnic groups. The
disorder is approximately 1.5-3 times more common in males than in females.
Prevalence
Tourette's Disorder occurs in approximately 4-5 individuals per 10,000.
Course
The age at onset of Tourette's Disorder may be as early as age 2 years, is usually during
childhood or early adolescence, and is by definition before age 18 years. The median
age at onset for motor tics is 7 years. The duration of the disorder is usually lifelong,
though periods of remission lasting from weeks to years may occur. In most cases, the
severity, frequency, and variability of the symptoms diminish during adolescence and
adulthood. In other cases, the symptoms disappear entirely, usually by early adulthood.
Familial Pattern
The vulnerability to Tourette's Disorder and related disorders is transmitted in an
autosomal dominant pattern. "Vulnerability" implies that the child receives the genetic307.22 Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder
103
or constitutional basis for developing a Tic Disorder; the precise type or severity of
disorder may be different from one generation to another. Not everyone who inherits
the genetic vulnerability will express symptoms of a Tic Disorder. Penetrance in female
gene carriers is about 70%; penetrance in male gene carriers is about 99%. The range of
forms in which the vulnerability may be expressed includes full-blown Tourette's
Disorder, Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder, some forms of Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder, and, perhaps, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. In about 10% of those
with Tourette's Disorder, there is no evidence of a familial pattern. Individuals with these
"nongenetic" forms of Tourette's Disorder or another tic disorder often have another
mental disorder (e.g., Pervasive Developmental Disorder) or a general medical condition
(e.g., a seizure disorder).
Differential Diagnosis
Refer to the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Tic Disorders (p. 100).
Diagnostic criteria for 307.23 Tourette's Disorder
A. Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been present at
some time during the illness, although not necessarily concurrently.
(A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, stereotyped motor
movement or vocalization.)
B. The tics occur many times a day (usually in bouts) nearly every day or
intermittently throughout a period of more than 1 year, and during this
period there was never a tic-free period of more than 3 consecutive
months.
C. The disturbance causes marked distress or significant impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The onset is before age 18 years.
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., stimulants) or a general medical condition (e.g.,
Huntington's disease or postviral encephalitis).
307.22 Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder is the presence of either
motor tics or vocal tics, but not both (Criterion A). This differs from Tourette's Disorder
in which there must be both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics. The other104
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
essential features (Criteria B, C, D, and E) are the same as for Tourette's Disorder. A
diagnosis of Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder cannot be made if the criteria for
Tourette's Disorder have ever been met (Criterion F). The other characteristics of Chronic
Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder are generally the same as for Tourette's Disorder (see p. 101),
except that the severity of the symptoms and the functional impairment are usually much
less. It appears that Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder and Tourette's Disorder may
be genetically related because they often occur in the same families.
Differential Diagnosis
Refer to the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Tic Disorders (p. 100).
Diagnostic criteria for 307.22 Chronic Motor or
Vocal Tic Disorder
A. Single or multiple motor or vocal tics (i.e., sudden, rapid, recurrent,
nonrhythmic, stereotyped motor movements or vocalizations), but not
both, have been present at some time during the illness.
B. The tics occur many times a day nearly every day or intermittently
throughout a period of more than 1 year, and during this period there
was never a tic-free period of more than 3 consecutive months.
C. The disturbance causes marked distress or significant impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The onset is before age 18 years.
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., stimulants) or a general medical condition (e.g.,
Huntington's disease or postviral encephalitis).
F. Criteria have never been met for Tourette's Disorder.
307.21 Transient Tic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Transient Tic Disorder is the presence of single or multiple motor
tics and/or vocal tics (Criterion A). The tics occur many times a day, nearly every day
for at least 4 weeks, but for no longer than 12 consecutive months (Criterion B). The
other essential features (Criteria C, D, and E) are the same as for Tourette's Disorder.
Transient Tic Disorder is not diagnosed if the criteria for Tourette's Disorder or Chronic
Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder (both of which require a duration of at least 1 year) have307.20 Tic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
105
ever been met (Criterion F). The other characteristics of the disorder are generally the
same as for Tourette's Disorder (see p. 101), except that the severity of the symptoms
and the functional impairment are usually much less.
Specifiers
The course of Transient Tic Disorder may be indicated by specifying Single Episode
or Recurrent.
Differential Diagnosis
Refer to the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Tic Disorders (p. 100).
I Diagnostic criteria for 307.21 Transient Tic Disorder
A. Single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics (i.e., sudden, rapid, recurrent,
nonrhythmic, stereotyped motor movements or vocalizations)
B. The tics occur many times a day, nearly every day for at least 4 weeks,
but for no longer than 12 consecutive months.
C. The disturbance causes marked distress or significant impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The onset is before age 18 years.
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., stimulants) or a general medical condition (e.g.,
Huntington's disease or postviral encephalitis).
F. Criteria have never been met for Tourette's Disorder or Chronic Motor
or Vocal Tic Disorder.
Specify if:
Single Episode or Recurrent
307.20 Tic Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders characterized by tics that do not meet criteria for a specific
Tic Disorder. Examples include tics lasting less than 4 weeks or tics with an onset after
age 18 years.106
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Elimination Disorders
Encopresis
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Encopresis is repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places
(e.g., clothing or floor) (Criterion A). Most often this is involuntary but occasionally may
be intentional. The event must occur at least once a month for at least 3 months (Criterion
B), and the chronological age of the child must be at least 4 years (or for children with
developmental delays, a mental age of at least 4 years) (Criterion C). The fecal
incontinence must not be due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., laxatives) or a general medical condition except through a mechanism involving
constipation (Criterion D).
When the passage of feces is involuntary rather than intentional, it is often related
to constipation, impaction, and retention with subsequent overflow. The constipation
may develop for psychological reasons (e.g., anxiety about defecating in a particular
place or a more general pattern of anxious or oppositional behavior) leading to
avoidance of defecation. Physiological predispositions to constipation include dehydra-
tion associated with a febrile illness, hypothyroidism, or a medication side effect. Once
constipation has developed, it may be complicated by an anal fissure, painful defecation,
and further fecal retention. The consistency of the stool may vary. In some individuals
it may be of normal or near-normal consistency. It may be liquid in other individuals
who have overflow incontinence secondary to fecal retention.
Subtypes
Encopresis is coded according to the subtype that characterizes the presentation:
787.6 With Constipation and Overflow Incontinence. There is evidence
of constipation on physical examination or by history. Feces are characteristically
(but not invariably) poorly formed and leakage is continuous, occurring both
during the day and during sleep. Only small amounts of feces are passed during
toiletting, and the incontinence resolves after treatment of the constipation.
307.7 Without Constipation and Overflow Incontinence. There is no
evidence of constipation on physical examination or by history. Feces are likely
to be of normal form and consistency, and soiling is intermittent. Feces may be
deposited in a prominent location. This is usually associated with the presence
of Oppositional Defiant Disorder or Conduct Disorder or may be the consequence
of anal masturbation.
Associated Features and Disorders
The child with Encopresis often feels ashamed and may wish to avoid situations (e.g.,
camp or school) that might lead to embarrassment. The amount of impairment is a
function of the effect on the child's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers,
and the anger, punishment, and rejection on the part of caregivers. Smearing feces may
be deliberate or accidental resulting from the child's attempt to clean or hide feces thatEncopresis
107
were passed involuntarily. When the incontinence is clearly deliberate, features of
Oppositional Defiant Disorder or Conduct Disorder may also be present. Many children
with Encopresis also have Enuresis.
Prevalence
It is estimated that approximately 1% of 5-year-olds have Encopresis, and the disorder
is more common in males than in females.
Course
Encopresis is not diagnosed until a child has reached a chronological age of at least
4 years (or for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 4 years).
Inadequate, inconsistent toilet training and psychosocial stress (e.g., entering school or
the birth of a sibling) may be predisposing factors. Two types of course have been
described: a "primary" type in which the individual has never established fecal
continence, and a "secondary" type in which the disturbance develops after a period of
established fecal continence. Encopresis can persist with intermittent exacerbations for
years but rarely becomes chronic.
Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of Encopresis in the presence of a general medical condition is appropriate
only if the mechanism involves constipation. Fecal incontinence related to other general
medical conditions (e.g., chronic diarrhea) would not warrant a DSM-IV diagnosis of
Encopresis.
• Diagnostic criteria for Encopresis
A. Repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g., clothing or
floor) whether involuntary or intentional.
B. At least one such event a month for at least 3 months.
C. Chronological age is at least 4 years (or equivalent developmental level).
D. The behavior is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., laxatives) or a general medical condition except
through a mechanism involving constipation.
Code as follows:
787.6 With Constipation and Overflow Incontinence
307.7 Without Constipation and Overflow Incontinence108
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
307.6 Enuresis (Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Enuresis is repeated voiding of urine during the day or at night
into bed or clothes (Criterion A). Most often this is involuntary but occasionally may be
intentional. To qualify for a diagnosis of Enuresis, the voiding of urine must occur at
least twice per week for at least 3 months or else must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion B). The individual must have reached an age at which continence is expected
(i.e., the chronological age of the child must be at least 5 years, or, for children with
developmental delays, a mental age of at least 5 years) (Criterion C). The urinary
incontinence is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., diuretics) or a general medical condition (e.g., diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure
disorder) (Criterion D).
Subtypes
The situation in which the Enuresis occurs may be noted by one of the following
subtypes:
Nocturnal Only. This is the most common subtype and is defined as passage
of urine only during nighttime sleep. The enuretic event typically occurs during
the first one-third of the night. Occasionally the voiding takes place during the
rapid eye movement (REM) stage of sleep, and the child may recall a dream tha
involved the act of urinating.
Diurnal Only. This subtype is defined as the passage of urine during waking
hours. Diurnal Enuresis is more common in females than in males and is
uncommon after age 9 years. The enuretic event most commonly occurs in the
early afternoon on school days. Diurnal enuresis is sometimes due to a reluctance
to use the toilet because of social anxiety or a preoccupation with school or play
activity.
Nocturnal and Diurnal. This subtype is defined as a combination of the two
subtypes above.
Associated Features and Disorders
The amount of impairment associated with Enuresis is a function of the limitation on
the child's social activities (e.g., ineligibility for sleep-away camp) or its effect on the
child's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment,
and rejection on the part of caregivers. Although most children with Enuresis do not
have a coexisting mental disorder, the prevalence of coexisting mental and other
developmental disorders is higher than in the general population. Encopresis, Sleep-
walking Disorder, and Sleep Terror Disorder may be present. Urinary tract infections are
more common in children with Enuresis, especially the Diurnal Type, than in those who
are continent. The Enuresis commonly persists after appropriate treatment of an
associated infection. A number of predisposing factors have been suggested, including
delayed or lax toilet training, psychosocial stress, a dysfunction in the ability to
concentrate urine, and a lower bladder volume threshold for involuntary voiding.307.6 Enuresis
109
Prevalence
The prevalence of Enuresis at age 5 years is 7% for males and 3% for females; at age
10 years the prevalence is 3% for males and 2% for females. At age 18 years, the
prevalence is 1% for males and less among females.
Course
Two types of course of Enuresis have been described: a "primary" type in which the
individual has never established urinary continence, and a "secondary" type in which
the disturbance develops after a period of established urinary continence. By definition,
primary Enuresis begins at age 5 years. The most common time for the onset of secondary
Enuresis is between the ages of 5 and 8 years, but it may occur at any time. After age
5 years, the rate of spontaneous remission is between 5% and 10% per year. Most children
with the disorder become continent by adolescence, but in approximately 1% of cases
the disorder continues into adulthood.
Familial Pattern
Approximately 75% of all children with Enuresis have a first-degree biological relative
who has had the disorder. The concordance for the disorder is greater in monozygotic
than in dizygotic twins.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of Enuresis is not made in the presence of a neurogenic bladder or the
presence of a general medical condition that causes polyuria or urgency (e.g.,
untreated diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus) or during an acute urinary tract
infection. However, a diagnosis of Enuresis is compatible with such conditions if urinary
incontinence was regularly present prior to the development of the general medical
condition or if it persists after the institution of appropriate treatment.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.6 Enuresis
A. Repeated voiding of urine into bed or clothes (whether involuntary or
intentional).
B. The behavior is clinically significant as manifested by either a frequency
of twice a week for at least 3 consecutive months or the presence of
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, academic (occupa-
tional), or other important areas of functioning.
C. Chronological age is at least 5 years (or equivalent developmental level).
(continued)110
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
D Diagnostic criteria for 307.6 Enuresis (continued)
D. The behavior is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effect of
a substance (e.g., a diuretic) or a general medical condition (e.g.,
diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure disorder).
Specify type:
Nocturnal Only
Diurnal Only
Nocturnal and Diurnal
Other Disorders of infancy, Chilkdhood, or Adolescence
309.21 Separation Anxiety Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Separation Anxiety Disorder is excessive anxiety concerning
separation from the home or from those to whom the person is attached (Criterion A).
This anxiety is beyond that which is expected for the individual's developmental level.
The disturbance must last for a period of at least 4 weeks (Criterion B), begin before
age 18 years (Criterion C), and cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning (Criterion D). The
diagnosis is not made if the anxiety occurs exclusively during the course of a Pervasive
Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, or other Psychotic Disorder or, in adolescents
or adults, if it is better accounted for by Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia (Criterion E).
Individuals with this disorder may experience recurrent excessive distress on
separation from home or major attachment figures (Criterion Al). When separated from
attachment figures, they often need to know their whereabouts and need to stay in touch
with them (e.g., by telephone calls). Some individuals become extremely homesick and
uncomfortable to the point of misery when away from home. They may yearn to return
home and be preoccupied with reunion fantasies. When separated from major attach-
ment figures, these individuals are often preoccupied with fears that accidents or illness
will befall the attachment figures or themselves (Criterion A2). Children with this disorder
often express fear of being lost and never being reunited with their parents (Criterion
A3). They are often uncomfortable when traveling independently away from the house
or from other familiar areas and may avoid going places by themselves. They may be
reluctant or refuse to attend school or camp, to visit or sleep at friends' homes, or to go
on errands (Criterion A4). These children may be unable to stay in a room by themselves
and may display "clinging" behavior, staying close to and "shadowing" the parent around
the house (Criterion A5).
Children with this disorder often have difficulty at bedtime and may insist that
someone stay with them until they fall asleep (Criterion A6). During the night, they may
make their way to their parents' bed (or that of another significant person, such as a309.21 Separation Anxiety Disorder
111
sibling); if entry to the parental bedroom is barred, they may sleep outside the parents'
door. There may be nightmares whose content expresses the individual's fears (e.g.,
destruction of the family through fire, murder, or other catastrophe) (Criterion A7).
Physical complaints, such as stomachaches, headaches, nausea, and vomiting are
common when separation occurs or is anticipated (Criterion A8). Cardiovascular
symptoms such as palpitations, dizziness, and feeling faint are rare in younger children
but may occur in older individuals.
Specifier
Early Onset. This specifier may be used to indicate onset of the disorder before
age 6 years.
Associated Features and Mental Disorders
Children with Separation Anxiety Disorder tend to come from families that are close-knit.
When separated from home or major attachment figures, they may recurrently exhibit
social withdrawal, apathy, sadness, or difficulty concentrating on work or play.
Depending on their age, individuals may have fears of animals, monsters, the dark,
muggers, burglars, kidnappers, car accidents, plane travel, and other situations that are
perceived as presenting danger to the integrity of the family or themselves. Concerns
about death and dying are common. School refusal may lead to academic difficulties
and social avoidance. Children may complain that no one loves them or cares about
them and that they wish they were dead. When extremely upset at the prospect of
separation, they may show anger or occasionally hit out at someone who is forcing
separation. When alone, especially in the evening, young children may report unusual
perceptual experiences (e.g., seeing people peering into their room, scary creatures
reaching for them, feeling eyes staring at them). Children with this disorder are often
described as demanding, intrusive, and in need of constant attention. The child's
excessive demands often become a source of parental frustration, leading to resentment
and conflict in the family. Sometimes, children with the disorder are described as
unusually conscientious, compliant, and eager to please. The children may have somatic
complaints that result in physical examinations and medical procedures. Depressed
mood is frequently present and may become more persistent over time, justifying an
additional diagnosis of Dysthymic Disorder or Major Depressive Disorder. The disorder
may precede the development of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
There are cultural variations in the degree to which it is considered desirable to tolerate
separation. It is important to differentiate Separation Anxiety Disorder from the high
value some cultures place on strong interdependence among family members.
The manifestations of the disorder may vary with age. Younger children may not
express specific fears of definite threats to parents, home, or themselves. As children get
older, worries or fears are often of specific dangers (e.g., kidnapping, mugging). Anxiety
and anticipation of separation become manifest in mid-childhood. Although adolescents
with this disorder, especially males, may deny anxiety about separation, it may be
reflected in their limited independent activity and reluctance to leave home. In older112
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
individuals, the disorder may limit the person's ability to handle changes in circumstances
(e.g., moving, getting married). Adults with the disorder are typically overconcerned
about their offspring and spouses and experience marked discomfort when separated
from them. In clinical samples, the disorder is apparently equally common in males and
females. In epidemiological samples, the disorder is more frequent in females.
Prevalence
Separation Anxiety Disorder is not uncommon; prevalence estimates average about 4%
in children and young adolescents.
Course
Separation Anxiety Disorder may develop after some life stress (e.g., the death of a
relative or pet, an illness of the child or a relative, a change of schools, a move to a new
neighborhood, or immigration). Onset may be as early as preschool age and may occur
at any time before age 18 years, but onset as late as adolescence is uncommon. Typically
there are periods of exacerbation and remission. Both the anxiety about possible
separation and the avoidance of situations involving separation (e.g., going away to
college) may persist for many years.
Familial Pattern
Separation Anxiety Disorder is apparently more common in first-degree biological
relatives than in the general population and may be more frequent in children of mothers
with Panic Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
Separation anxiety can be an associated feature of Pervasive Developmental Disor-
ders, Schizophrenia, or other Psychotic Disorders. If the symptoms of Separation
Anxiety Disorder occur exclusively during the course of one of these disorders, a separate
diagnosis of Separation Anxiety Disorder is not given. Separation Anxiety Disorder is
distinguished from Generalized Anxiety Disorder in that the anxiety predominantly
concerns separation from home and attachment figures. In children or adolescents with
Separation Anxiety Disorder, threats of separation may lead to extreme anxiety and even
a Panic Attack. In contrast to Panic Disorder, the anxiety concerns separation from
attachment figures or from home rather than being incapacitated by an unexpected Panic
Attack. In adults, Separation Anxiety Disorder is rare and should not be given as an
additional diagnosis if the separation fears are better accounted for by Agoraphobia in
Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia or Agoraphobia Without History of Panic
Disorder. Truancy is common in Conduct Disorder, but anxiety about separation is
not responsible for school absences and the child usually stays away from, rather than
returns to, the home. Some cases of school refusal, especially in adolescence, are due
to Social Phobia or Mood Disorders rather than separation anxiety. Unlike the halluci-
nations in Psychotic Disorders, the unusual perceptual experiences in Separation
Anxiety Disorder are usually based on a misperception of an actual stimulus, occur only
in certain situations (e.g., nighttime), and are reversed by the presence of an attachment309.21 Separation Anxiety Disorder
113
figure. Clinical judgment must be used in distinguishing developmentally appropriate
levels of separation anxiety from the clinically significant concerns about separation
seen in Separation Anxiety Disorder.
I Diagnostic criteria for 309.21 Separation Anxiety
Disorder
A. Developmentally inappropriate and excessive anxiety concerning sep-
aration from home or from those to whom the individual is attached, as
evidenced by three (or more) of the following:
(1) recurrent excessive distress when separation from home or major
attachment figures occurs or is anticipated
(2) persistent and excessive worry about losing, or about possible harm
befalling, major attachment figures
(3) persistent and excessive worry that an untoward event will lead to
separation from a major attachment figure (e.g., getting lost or being
kidnapped)
(4) persistent reluctance or refusal to go to school or elsewhere
because of fear of separation
(5) persistently and excessively fearful or reluctant to be alone or
without major attachment figures at home or without significant
adults in other settings
(6) persistent reluctance or refusal to go to sleep without being near
a major attachment figure or to sleep away from home
(7) repeated nightmares involving the theme of separation
(8) repeated complaints of physical symptoms (such as headaches,
stomachaches, nausea, or vomiting) when separation from major
attachment figures occurs or is anticipated
B. The duration of the disturbance is at least 4 weeks.
C. The onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning.
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, or other Psychotic
Disorder and, in adolescents and adults, is not better accounted for by
Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia.
Specify if:
Early Onset: if onset occurs before age 6 years114
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
313.23 Selective Mutism
(formerly Elective Mutism)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Selective Mutism is the persistent failure to speak in specific
social situations (e.g., school, with playmates) where speaking is expected, despite
speaking in other situations (Criterion A). The disturbance interferes with educational
or occupational achievement or with social communication (Criterion B). The distur-
bance must last for at least 1 month and is not limited to the first month of school (during
which many children may be shy and reluctant to speak) (Criterion C). Selective Mutism
should not be diagnosed if the individual's failure to speak is due solely to a lack of
knowledge of, or comfort with, the spoken language required in the social situation
(Criterion D). It is also not diagnosed if the disturbance is better accounted for by
embarrassment related to having a Communication Disorder (e.g., Stuttering) or if it
occurs exclusively during a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, or other
Psychotic Disorder (Criterion E). Instead of communicating by standard verbalization,
children with this disorder may communicate by gestures, nodding or shaking the head,
or pulling or pushing, or, in some cases, by monosyllabic, short, or monotone utterances,
or in an altered voice.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated features of Selective Mutism may include excessive shyness, fear of social
embarrassment, social isolation and withdrawal, clinging, compulsive traits, negativism,
temper tantrums, or controlling or oppositional behavior, particularly at home. There
may be severe impairment in social and school functioning. Teasing or scapegoating by
peers is common. Although children with this disorder generally have normal language
skills, there may occasionally be an associated Communication Disorder (e.g., Phono-
logical Disorder, Expressive Language Disorder, or Mixed Receptive-Expressive Lan-
guage Disorder) or a general medical condition that causes abnormalities of articulation.
Anxiety Disorders (especially Social Phobia), Mental Retardation, hospitalization, or
extreme psychosocial stressors may be associated with the disorder.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Immigrant children who are unfamiliar with or uncomfortable in the official language
of their new host country may refuse to speak to strangers in their new environment.
This behavior should not be diagnosed as Selective Mutism. Selective Mutism is slightly
more common in females than in males.
Prevalence
Selective Mutism is apparently rare and is found in fewer than 1% of individuals seen
in mental health settings.313-23 Selective Mutism
115
Course
Onset of Selective Mutism is usually before age 5 years, but the disturbance may not
come to clinical attention until entry into school. Although the disturbance usually lasts
for only a few months, it may sometimes persist longer and may even continue for
several years.
Differential Diagnosis
Selective Mutism should be distinguished from speech disturbances that are better
accounted for by a Communication Disorder, such as Phonological Disorder,
Expressive Language Disorder, Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder,
or Stuttering. Unlike Selective Mutism, the speech disturbance in these conditions is
not restricted to a specific social situation. Children in families who have immigrated to
a country where a different language is spoken may refuse to speak the new language
because of lack of knowledge of the language. If comprehension of the new language
is adequate, but refusal to speak persists, a diagnosis of Selective Mutism may be
warranted. Individuals with a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia
or other Psychotic Disorder, or severe Mental Retardation may have problems in
social communication and be unable to speak appropriately in social situations. In
contrast, Selective Mutism should only be diagnosed in a child who has an established
capacity to speak in some social situations (e.g., typically at home). The social anxiety
and social avoidance in Social Phobia may be associated with Selective Mutism. In such
cases, both diagnoses may be given.
Diagnostic criteria for 313.23 Selective Mutism
A. Consistent failure to speak in specific social situations (in which there
is an expectation for speaking, e.g., at school) despite speaking in other
situations.
B. The disturbance interferes with educational or occupational achieve-
ment or with social communication.
C. The duration of the disturbance is at least 1 month (not limited to the
first month of school).
D. The failure to speak is not due to a lack of knowledge of, or comfort
with, the spoken language required in the social situation.
E. The disturbance is not better accounted for by a Communication
Disorder (e.g., Stuttering) and does not occur exclusively during the
course of a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Schizophrenia, or other
Psychotic Disorder.116
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
313.89 Reactive Attachment Disorder
of Infancy or Early Childhood
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Reactive Attachment Disorder is markedly disturbed and
developmentally inappropriate social relatedness in most contexts that begins before
age 5 years and is associated with grossly pathological care (Criterion A). There are two
types of presentations. In the Inhibited Type, the child persistently fails to initiate and
to respond to most social interactions in a developmentally appropriate way. The child
shows a pattern of excessively inhibited, hypervigilant, or highly ambivalent responses
(e.g., frozen watchfulness, resistance to comfort, or a mixture of approach and
avoidance) (Criterion Al). In the Disinhibited Type, there is a pattern of diffuse
attachments. The child exhibits indiscriminate sociability or a lack of selectivity in the
choice of attachment figures (Criterion A2). The disturbance is not accounted for solely
by developmental delay (e.g., as in Mental Retardation) and does not meet criteria for
Pervasive Developmental Disorder (Criterion B). By definition, the condition is associ-
ated with grossly pathological care that may take the form of persistent disregard of the
child's basic emotional needs for comfort, stimulation, and affection (Criterion Cl);
persistent disregard of the child's basic physical needs (Criterion C2); or repeated changes
of primary caregiver that prevent formation of stable attachments (e.g., frequent changes
in foster care) (Criterion C3). The pathological care is presumed to be responsible for
the disturbed social relatedness (Criterion D).
Subtypes
The predominant type of disturbance in social relatedness may be indicated by specifying
one of the following subtypes for Reactive Attachment Disorder:
Inhibited Type. In this subtype, the predominant disturbance in social related-
ness is the persistent failure to initiate and to respond to most social interactions
in a developmentally appropriate way.
Disinhibited Type. This subtype is used if the predominant disturbance in
social relatedness is indiscriminate sociability or a lack of selectivity in the choice
of attachment figures.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Certain situations (e.g.,
prolonged hospitalization of the child, extreme poverty, or parental inexperience) may
predispose to the development of pathological care. However, grossly pathological care
does not always result in the development of Reactive Attachment Disorder; some
children may form stable attachments and social relationships even in the face of marked
neglect or abuse. Reactive Attachment Disorder may be associated with developmental
delays, Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood, Pica, or Rumination Disorder.
Associated laboratory findings. Laboratory findings consistent with malnutrition
may be present.313.89 Reactive Attachment Disorder
117
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Physical examination may document associated general medical conditions that might
contribute to, or result from, difficulties in caring for the child (e.g., growth delay,
evidence of physical abuse).
Prevalence
Epidemiological data are limited, but Reactive Attachment Disorder appears to be very
uncommon.
Course
The onset of Reactive Attachment Disorder is usually in the first several years of life and,
by definition, begins before age 5 years. The course appears to vary depending on
individual factors in child and caregivers, the severity and duration of associated
psychosocial deprivation, and the nature of intervention. Considerable improvement or
remission may occur if an appropriately supportive environment is provided. Otherwise,
the disorder follows a continuous course.
Differential Diagnosis
In Mental Retardation, appropriate attachments to caregivers usually develop consis-
tent with the child's general developmental level. However, some infants and young
children with Severe Mental Retardation may present particular problems for caregivers
and exhibit symptoms characteristic of Reactive Attachment Disorder. Reactive Attach-
ment Disorder should be diagnosed only if it is clear that the characteristic problems in
formation of selective attachments are not a function of the retardation.
Reactive Attachment Disorder must be differentiated from Autistic Disorder and
other Pervasive Developmental Disorders. In the Pervasive Developmental Disor-
ders, selective attachments either fail to develop or are highly deviant, but this usually
occurs in the face of a reasonably supportive psychosocial environment. Autistic Disorder
and other Pervasive Developmental Disorders are also characterized by the presence of
a qualitative impairment in communication and restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped
patterns of behavior. Reactive Attachment Disorder is not diagnosed if the criteria are
met for a Pervasive Developmental Disorder. The Disinhibited Type must be distin-
guished from the impulsive or hyperactive behavior characteristic of Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder. In contrast to Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, the
clisinhibited behavior in Reactive Attachment Disorder is characteristically associated
with attempting to form a social attachment after a very brief acquaintance.
Grossly pathogenic care is a defining feature of Reactive Attachment Disorder. An
additional notation of Child Abuse, Child Neglect, or a Parent-Child Relational Problem
may be warranted. When grossly pathogenic care does not result in marked disturbances
in social relatedness, Child Neglect or Parent-Child Relational Problem may be noted
rather than Reactive Attachment Disorder.118
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
• Diagnostic criteria for 313.89 Reactive Attachment
Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood
A. Markedly disturbed and developmentally inappropriate social related-
ness in most contexts, beginning before age 5 years, as evidenced by
either (1) or (2):
(1) persistent failure to initiate or respond in a developmentally
appropriate fashion to most social interactions, as manifest by
excessively inhibited, hypervigilant, or highly ambivalent and
contradictory responses (e.g., the child may respond to caregivers
with a mixture of approach, avoidance, and resistance to comfort-
ing, or may exhibit frozen watchfulness)
(2) diffuse attachments as manifest by indiscriminate sociability with
marked inability to exhibit appropriate selective attachments (e.g.,
excessive familiarity with relative strangers or lack of selectivity in
choice of attachment figures)
B. The disturbance in Criterion A is not accounted for solely by develop-
mental delay (as in Mental Retardation) and does not meet criteria for
a Pervasive Developmental Disorder.
C. Pathogenic care as evidenced by at least one of the following:
(1) persistent disregard of the child's basic emotional needs for com-
fort, stimulation, and affection
(2) persistent disregard of the child's basic physical needs
(3) repeated changes of primary caregiver that prevent formation of
stable attachments (e.g., frequent changes in foster care)
D. There is a presumption that the care in Criterion C is responsible for the
disturbed behavior in Criterion A (e.g., the disturbances in Criterion A
began following the pathogenic care in Criterion C).
Specify type:
Inhibited Type: if Criterion Al predominates in the clinical presentation
Disinhibited Type: if Criterion A2 predominates in the clinical presentation
307.3 Stereotypic Movement Disorder
(formerly Stereotypy/Habit Disorder)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Stereotypic Movement Disorder is motor behavior that is
repetitive, often seemingly driven, and nonfunctional (Criterion A). This motor behavior
markedly interferes with normal activities or results in self-inflicted bodily injury that is
significant enough to require medical treatment (or would result in such injury if307.3 Stereotypic Movement Disorder
119
protective measures were not used) (Criterion B). If Mental Retardation is present, the
stereotypic or self-injurious behavior is sufficiently severe to become a focus of treatment
(Criterion C). The behavior is not better accounted for by a compulsion (as in
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder), a tic (as in the Tic Disorders), a stereotypy that is part
of a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, or hair pulling (as in Trichotillomania) (Criterion
D). The behavior is also not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a
general medical condition (Criterion E). The motor behaviors must persist for at least
4 weeks (Criterion F).
The stereotypic movements may include hand waving, rocking, playing with hands,
fiddling with fingers, twirling objects, head banging, self-biting, picking at skin or bodily
orifices, or hitting various parts of one's own body. Sometimes the individual uses an
object in performing these behaviors. The behaviors may cause permanent and disabling
tissue damage and may sometimes be life-threatening. For instance, severe head banging
or hitting may lead to cuts, bleeding, infection, retinal detachment, and blindness.
Specifiers
The clinician may specify With Self-Injurious Behavior if the behavior results in bodily
damage that requires specific treatment (or that would result in bodily damage if
protective measures were not used).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. The individual may de-
velop methods of self-restraint (e.g., holding hands inside shirts, trousers, or in pockets)
to attempt to control the self-injurious behaviors. When the self-restraint is interfered
with, the behaviors return. If the behaviors are extreme or repulsive to others, there may
be psychosocial complications due to the individual's exclusion from social and
community activities. Stereotypic Movement Disorder occurs most commonly in associ-
ation with Mental Retardation. The more severe the retardation, the higher the risk for
self-injurious behaviors. This disorder may also occur in association with severe sensory
deficits (blindness and deafness) and may be more common in institutional environments
in which the individual receives insufficient stimulation. Self-injurious behaviors occur
in certain general medical conditions associated with Mental Retardation (e.g., fragile X
syndrome, de Lange syndrome, and especially Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, which is
characterized by severe self-biting).
Associated laboratory findings. If there is self-injury, the laboratory findings will
reflect its nature and severity (e.g., anemia may be present if there is a chronic blood
loss from self-inflicted rectal bleeding).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Signs of chronic tissue damage may be present (e.g., bruises, bite marks, cuts, scratches,
skin infections, rectal fissures, foreign bodies in bodily orifices, visual impairment due
to eye gouging or traumatic cataract, and fractures or deformed bones). In less severe
cases, there may be a chronic skin irritation or calluses from biting, pinching, scratching,
or saliva smearing.120
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Specific Age and Gender Features
Self-injurious behaviors occur in individuals of all ages. There are indications that head
banging is more prevalent in males (with about a 3:1 ratio), and self-biting may be more
prevalent in females.
Prevalence
There is limited information on the prevalence of Stereotypic Movement Disorder. The
estimates of prevalence of self-injurious behaviors in individuals with Mental Retardatio
vary from 2% and 3% in children and adolescents living in the community to approxi-
mately 25% in adults with severe or profound Mental Retardation living in institutions.
Course
There is no typical age at onset or pattern of onset for Stereotypic Movement Disorder.
The onset may follow a stressful environmental event. In nonverbal individuals with
Severe Mental Retardation, Stereotypic movements may be triggered by a painful general
medical condition (e.g., a middle ear infection leading to head banging). The Stereotypic
movements often peak in adolescence and then may gradually decline. However,
especially in individuals with Severe or Profound Mental Retardation, the movements
may persist for years. The focus of these behaviors often changes (e.g., a person may
engage in hand biting that may then subside and head hitting may emerge).
Differential
Diagnosis
Stereotypic movements may be associated with Mental Retardation, especially for
individuals in nonstimulating environments. Stereotypic Movement Disorder should be
diagnosed only in individuals in whom the Stereotypic or self-injurious behavior is of
sufficient severity to become a focus of treatment. Repetitive stereotyped movements
are a characteristic feature of Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Stereotypic
Movement Disorder is not diagnosed if the stereotypies are better accounted for by a
Pervasive Developmental Disorder. Compulsions in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
are generally more complex and ritualistic and are performed in response to an obsession
or according to rules that must be applied rigidly. Differentiating the complex movements
characteristic of Stereotypic Movement Disorder from simple tics (e.g., eye blinking) is
relatively straightforward, but the differential diagnosis with complex motor tics is less
clear-cut. In general, stereotyped movements appear to be more driven and intentional,
whereas tics have a more involuntary quality and are not rhythmic. In Trichotillomania,
by definition, the repetitive behavior is limited to hair pulling. The self-induced injuries
in Stereotypic Movement Disorder should be distinguished from Factitious Disorder
With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symptoms, in which the motivation of the
self-injury is to assume the sick role. Self-mutilation associated with certain Psy-
chotic Disorders and Personality Disorders is premeditated, complex, and sporadic
and has a meaning for the individual within the context of the underlying, severe mental
disorder (e.g., is the result of delusional thinking). Involuntary movements associated
with neurological conditions (such as Huntington's disease) usually follow a typical
pattern, and the signs and symptoms of the neurological condition are present.307.3 Stereotypic Movement Disorder
121
Developmentally appropriate self-stimulatory behaviors in young children (e.g.,
thumb sucking, rocking, and head banging) are usually self-limited and rarely result in
tissue damage requiring treatment. Self-stimulatory behaviors in individuals with
sensory deficits (e.g., blindness) usually do not result in dysfunction or in self-injury.
I Diagnostic criteria for 307.3 Stereotypic Movement
Disorder
A. Repetitive, seemingly driven, and nonfunctional motor behavior (e.g.,
hand shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, mouthing of
objects, self-biting, picking at skin or bodily orifices, hitting own body).
B. The behavior markedly interferes with normal activities or results in
self-inflicted bodily injury that requires medical treatment (or would
result in an injury if preventive measures were not used).
C. If Mental Retardation is present, the Stereotypic or self-injurious behavior
is of sufficient severity to become a focus of treatment.
D. The behavior is not better accounted for by a compulsion (as in
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder), a tic (as in Tic Disorder), a stereotypy
that is part of a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, or hair pulling (as
in Trichotillomania).
E. The behavior is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance
or a general medical condition.
F. The behavior persists for 4 weeks or longer.
Specify if:
With Self-Injurious Behavior: if the behavior results in bodily damage
that requires specific treatment (or that would result in bodily damage if
protective measures were not used)
313.9 Disorder of Infancy, Childhood, or
Adolescence Not Otherwise Specified
This category is a residual category for disorders with onset in infancy, childhood, or
adolescence that do not meet criteria for any specific disorder in the Classification.This page intentionally left blankDelirium, Dementia, and
Amnestic and Other
Cognitive Disorders
T
his section includes Delirium, Dementia, Amnestic Disorders, and Cognitive
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. The predominant disturbance is a clinically
significant deficit in cognition or memory that represents a significant change from a
previous level of functioning. For each disorder in this section, the etiology is either a
general medical condition (although the specific general medical condition may not be
identifiable) or a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, medication, or toxin), or a combination
of these factors.
In DSM-III-R, these disorders were placed in a section titled "Organic Mental
Syndromes and Disorders." The term organic mental disorder is no longer used in
DSM-IV because it incorrectly implies that "nonorganic" mental disorders do not have
a biological basis. In DSM-IV, disorders formerly called "organic mental disorders" have
been grouped into three sections: 1) Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other
Cognitive Disorders; 2) Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition; and
3) Substance-Related Disorders.
A delirium is characterized by a disturbance of consciousness and a change in
cognition that develop over a short period of time. The disorders included in the
"Delirium" section are listed according to presumed etiology: Delirium Due to a General
Medical Condition, Substance-Induced Delirium (i.e., due to a drug of abuse, a
medication, or toxin exposure), Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies, or Delirium Not
Otherwise Specified (if the etiology is indeterminate).
A dementia is characterized by multiple cognitive deficits that include impairment
in memory. The dementias are also listed according to presumed etiology: Dementia of
the Alzheimer's Type, Vascular Dementia, Dementia Due to Other General Medical
Conditions (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease, head trauma, Parkinson's
disease, Huntington's disease), Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia (i.e., due to a
drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin exposure), Dementia Due to Multiple Etiologies,
or Dementia Not Otherwise Specified (if the etiology is indeterminate).
An amnestic disorder is characterized by memory impairment in the absence of
other significant cognitive impairments. The disorders in the "Amnestic Disorders"
section also are listed according to presumed etiology: Amnestic Disorder Due to a
123124
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
General Medical Condition, Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder, or Amnes-
tic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Cognitive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is for presentations that are
characterized by cognitive dysfunction presumed to be due to either a general medical
condition or substance use that do not meet criteria for any of the disorders listed
elsewhere in this section.
Introductory text is provided that discusses the general features for each group of
disorders, regardless of etiology. This is followed by text and criteria for each disorder
with specific etiology.
Delirium
The disorders in the "Delirium" section share a common symptom presentation of a
disturbance in consciousness and cognition, but are differentiated based on etiology:
Delirium Due to a General Medical Condition, Substance-Induced Delirium
(including medication side effects), and Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies. In
addition, Delirium Not Otherwise Specified is included in this section for presenta-
tions in which the clinician is unable to determine a specific etiology for the delirium.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a delirium is a disturbance of consciousness that is accompanied
by a change in cognition that cannot be better accounted for by a preexisting or evolving
dementia. The disturbance develops over a short period of time, usually hours to days,
and tends to fluctuate during the course of the day. There is evidence from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory tests that the delirium is a direct physiological
consequence of a general medical condition, Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal, use
of a medication, or toxin exposure, or a Combination of these factors.
The disturbance in consciousness is manifested by a reduced clarity of awareness
of the environment. The ability to focus, sustain, or shift attention is impaired (Criterion
A). Questions must be repeated because the individual's attention wanders, or the
individual may perseverate with an answer to a previous question rather than appropri-
ately shift attention. The person is easily distracted by irrelevant stimuli. Because of these
problems, it may be difficult (or impossible) to engage the person in conversation.
There is an accompanying change in cognition (which may include memory
impairment, disorientation, or language disturbance) or development of a perceptual
disturbance (Criterion B). Memory impairment is most commonly evident in recent
memory and can be tested by asking the person to remember several unrelated objects
or a brief sentence, and then to repeat them after a few minutes of distraction.
Disorientation is usually manifested by the individual being disoriented to time (e.g.,
thinking it is morning in the middle of the night) or being disoriented to place (e.g.,
thinking he or she is home rather than in a hospital). In mild delirium, disorientation to
time may be the first symptom to appear. Disorientation to self is less common. Language
disturbance may be evident as dysnomia (i.e., the impaired ability to name objects) or
dysgraphia (i.e., the impaired ability to write). In some cases, speech is rambling and
irrelevant, in others pressured and incoherent, with unpredictable switching from subjectDelirium
125
to subject. It may be difficult for the clinician to assess for changes in cognitive function
because the individual may be inattentive and incoherent. Under these circumstances,
it is helpful to review carefully the individual's history and to obtain information from
other informants, particularly family members.
Perceptual disturbances may include misinterpretations, illusions, or hallucinations.
For example, the banging of a door may be mistaken for a gunshot (misinterpretation);
the folds of the bedclothes may appear to be animate objects (illusion); or the person
may "see" a group of people hovering over the bed when no one is actually there
(hallucination). Although sensory misperceptions are most commonly visual, they may
occur in other sensory modalities as well. Misperceptions range from simple and uniform
to highly complex. The individual may have a delusional conviction of the reality of the
hallucinations and exhibit emotional and behavioral responses in keeping with their
content.
The disturbance develops over a short period of time and tends to fluctuate during
the course of the day (Criterion C). For example, during morning hospital rounds, the
person may be coherent and cooperative, but at night might insist on pulling out
intravenous lines and going home to parents who died years ago.
Associated Features and Disorders
Delirium is often associated with a disturbance in the sleep-wake cycle. This disturbance
can include daytime sleepiness or nighttime agitation and difficulty falling asleep. In
some cases, complete reversal of the night-day sleep-wake cycle can occur. Delirium is
frequently accompanied by disturbed psychomotor behavior. Many individuals with
delirium are restless or hyperactive. Manifestations of increased psychomotor activity
may include groping or picking at the bedclothes, attempting to get out of bed when it
is unsafe or untimely, and sudden movements. On the other hand, the individual may
show decreased psychomotor activity, with sluggishness and lethargy that approach
stupor. Psychomotor activity can shift from one extreme to the other over the course of
a day. Impaired judgment may interfere with proper medical treatment.
The individual may exhibit emotional disturbances such as anxiety, fear, depression,
irritability, anger, euphoria, and apathy. There may be rapid and unpredictable shifts
from one emotional state to another, although some individuals with delirium have a
constant emotional tone. Fear often accompanies threatening hallucinations or transient
delusions. If fear is marked, the person may attack those who are falsely perceived as
threatening. Injuries may be sustained from falling out of bed or trying to escape while
attached to intravenous lines, respiratory tubes, urinary catheters, or other medical
equipment. The disturbed emotional state may also be evident in calling out, screaming,
cursing, muttering, moaning, or other sounds. These behaviors are especially prevalent
at night and under conditions in which stimulation and environmental cues are lacking.
In addition to laboratory findings that are characteristic of associated or etiological
general medical conditions (or intoxication or withdrawal states), the EEC is typically
abnormal, showing either generalized slowing or fast activity.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Cultural and educational background should be taken into consideration in the
evaluation of an individual's mental capacity. Individuals from certain backgrounds may126
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
not be familiar with the information used in certain tests of general knowledge (e.g.,
names of presidents, geographical knowledge), memory (e.g., date of birth in cultures
that do not routinely celebrate birthdays), and orientation (e.g., sense of placement and
location may be conceptualized differently in some cultures).
Children may be more susceptible to delirium than adults, especially when it is
related to febrile illnesses and certain medications (e.g., anticholinergics). In children,
delirium may be mistaken for uncooperative behavior, and eliciting the distinctive
cognitive signs may be difficult. If familiar figures cannot soothe the child, this may be
suggestive of delirium. The sex ratio for delirium reflects that of the elderly population
in general (in which the ratio of women to men increases with increasing age), the group
at highest risk for developing delirium.
Prevalence
In individuals over age 65 years who are hospitalized for a general medical condition,
approximately 10% are reported to exhibit delirium on admission and another 10%-15%
may develop delirium while in the hospital.
Course
The symptoms of delirium usually develop over hours to days. They may begin abruptly
(e.g., after a head injury). More typically, single symptoms progress to full-blown delirium
within a 3-day period. The delirium may resolve in a few hours, or symptoms may persist
for weeks, particularly in individuals with coexisting dementia. If the underlying
etiological factor is promptly corrected or is self-limited, recovery is more likely to be
complete.
Differential
Diagnosis
The most common differential diagnostic issue is whether the person has a dementia
rather than a delirium, has a delirium alone, or has a delirium superimposed on a
preexisting dementia. Memory impairment is common to both a delirium and a dementia,
but the person with a dementia alone is alert and does not have the disturbance in
consciousness that is characteristic of a delirium. When symptoms of a delirium are
present, information from family members, other caretakers, or medical records may be
helpful in determining whether the symptoms of a dementia were preexisting. Coding
of a delirium superimposed on the different types of dementias is discussed under
"Recording Procedures" for each type of delirium.
The presumed etiology determines the specific delirium diagnosis (text and criteria
for each delirium diagnosis are provided separately later in this section). If it is judged
that the delirium is a consequence of the direct physiological effects of a general medical
condition, then Delirium Due to a General Medical Condition is diagnosed. If the delirium
results from the direct physiological effects of a drug of abuse, then Substance
Intoxication Delirium or Substance Withdrawal Delirium is diagnosed, depending on
whether the delirium occurred in association with Substance Intoxication or Substance
Withdrawal. If the delirium results from medication use or toxin exposure, then
Substance-Induced Delirium is diagnosed. It is not uncommon for the delirium to be
due to both a general medical condition and substance (including medication) use. ThisDelirium
127
may be seen, for example, in an elderly individual with a serious general medical
condition that is being treated with multiple medications. When there is more than one
etiology (e.g., both a substance and a general medical condition), Delirium Due to
Multiple Etiologies is diagnosed. If it is not possible to establish a specific etiology
(i.e., substance induced or clue to a general medical condition), Delirium Not Otherwise
Specified is diagnosed.
The diagnosis of Substance Intoxication Delirium or Substance Withdrawal Delirium
is made instead of Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal only if the
symptoms of the delirium are in excess of those usually associated with the intoxication
or withdrawal syndrome and are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention. Even in individuals with obvious signs of intoxication or withdrawal, other
possible causes of the delirium (i.e., Delirium Due to a General Medical Condition)
must not be overlooked. For example, a head injury that occurs as a result of falls or
fighting during intoxication may be responsible for the delirium.
Delirium that is characterized by vivid hallucinations, delusions, language distur-
bances, and agitation must be distinguished from Brief Psychotic Disorder, Schizo-
phrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, and other Psychotic Disorders, as well as
from Mood Disorders With Psychotic Features. In delirium, the psychotic symptoms
fluctuate, are fragmented and unsystematized, occur in the context of a reduced ability
to appropriately maintain and shift attention, and are usually associated with EEG
abnormalities. There is often memory impairment and disorientation in delirium, but
generally not in these other disorders. Finally, in delirium, the person generally shows
evidence of an underlying general medical condition, Substance Intoxication or With-
drawal, or medication use.
Delirium must be distinguished from Malingering and from Factitious Disorder.
This distinction is made based on the often atypical presentation in Malingering and
Factitious Disorder and the absence of a general medical condition or substance that is
etiologically related to the apparent cognitive disturbance.
Individuals may present with some but not all symptoms of delirium. Subsyndromal
presentations need to be carefully assessed because they may be harbingers of a
full-blown delirium or may signal an as yet undiagnosed underlying general medical
condition. Such presentations should be coded as Cognitive Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified.
293.0 Delirium Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic and Associated Features
The descriptive features of Delirium Due to a General Medical Condition (Criteria A-C)
are discussed on pp. 124-125. In addition, to diagnose Delirium Due to a General Medical
Condition, there must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the cognitive disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of a
general medical condition (Criterion D).
In determining whether the delirium is due to a general medical condition, the
clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition. Further, the
clinician must establish that the delirium is etiologically related to the general medical
condition. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to
make this judgment. Although there are no infallible guidelines, several considerations128
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a temporal
association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general medical
condition and that of the delirium. Evidence from the literature that suggests that there
can be a direct association between the general medical condition in question and the
development of a delirium can provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular
situation. In addition, the clinician must also judge that the disturbance is not better
accounted for by a Substance-Induced Delirium or a primary mental disorder (e.g., a
Manic Episode). This determination is explained in greater detail in the "Mental Disorders
Due to a General Medical Condition" section (p. 165).
Delirium can be associated with many different general medical conditions, each of
which has characteristic physical examination and laboratory findings. In systemic
illnesses, focal neurological signs are not usually found. Various forms of tremor may
be present. Asterixis, a flapping movement of the hyperextended hands, was originally
described in hepatic encephalopathy but may also be found in association with other
causes of delirium. Signs of autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., tachycardia, sweating, flushed
face, dilated pupils, and elevated blood pressure) commonly occur. In addition to
laboratory findings that are characteristic of etiological general medical conditions (or
intoxication or withdrawal states), the EEG is generally abnormal, showing either
generalized slowing or fast activity.
Recording Procedures
In recording the diagnosis of Delirium Due to a General Medical Condition, the clinician
should note both the delirium and the identified general medical condition judged to
be causing the disturbance on Axis I (e.g., 293.0 Delirium Due to Hypoglycemia). The
ICD-9-CM code for the general medical condition should also be noted on Axis III (e.g.,
251.2 hypoglycemia.) (See Appendix G for a list of selected ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes
for general medical conditions.) In an individual with an established history of Dementia
of the Alzheimer's Type or Vascular Dementia, a superimposed delirium should be noted
by coding the appropriate subtype of the dementia (e.g., 290.3 Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, With Delirium). For other dementias, both dementia
and delirium should be coded on Axis I (e.g., 294.1 Dementia Due to Parkinson's Disease
and 293-0 Delirium Due to Hepatic Encephalopathy). In situations in which it is unclear
whether the cognitive deficits are due to delirium or to dementia, it may be useful to
make a provisional diagnosis of delirium and observe the person carefully while
continuing efforts to identify the nature of the disturbance.
Associated General Medical Conditions
Etiological general medical conditions for delirium include systemic infections, metabolic
disorders (e.g., hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypoglycemia), fluid or electrolyte imbalances,
hepatic or renal disease, thiamine deficiency, postoperative states, hypertensive enceph-
alopathy, postictal states, and sequelae of head trauma. Certain focal lesions of the right
parietal lobe and inferomedial surface of the occipital lobe also may lead to a delirium.
Differential
Diagnosis
See p. 126 for a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of delirium.Delirium
129
Diagnostic criteria for 293.0 Delirium Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. Disturbance of consciousness (i.e., reduced clarity of awareness of the
environment) with reduced ability to focus, sustain, or shift attention.
B. A change in cognition (such as memory deficit, disorientation, language
disturbance) or the development of a perceptual disturbance that is not
better accounted for by a preexisting, established, or evolving dementia.
C. The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to
days) and tends to fluctuate during the course of the day.
D. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is caused by the direct physiological
consequences of a general medical condition.
Coding note: If delirium is superimposed on a preexisting Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type or Vascular Dementia, indicate the delirium by coding the
appropriate subtype of the dementia, e.g., 290.3 Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type,
With Late Onset, With Delirium.
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
293.0 Delirium Due to Hepatic Encephalopathy; also code the general medical
condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).
Substance-Induced Delirium
Diagnostic and Associated Features
The descriptive features of Substance-Induced Delirium (Criteria A-C) are discussed on
pp. 124—125. In addition, to diagnose Substance-Induced Delirium, there must be
evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of Substance
Intoxication or Withdrawal, medication side effects, or toxin exposure judged to be
etiologically related to the delirium (Criterion D). A delirium that occurs during Substance
Intoxication is diagnosed as Substance Intoxication Delirium; a delirium that occurs
during Substance Withdrawal is diagnosed as Substance Withdrawal Delirium; and a
delirium that is associated with medication side effects or toxin exposure is diagnosed
as Substance-Induced Delirium (see criteria set for Substance Intoxication Delirium,
p. 131).
Delirium that occurs during Substance Intoxication may arise within minutes to hours
after taking relatively high doses of certain drugs such as cannabis, cocaine, and
hallucinogens. With other drugs such as alcohol, barbiturates, or meperidine, delirium
sometimes develops only after intoxication is sustained for some days. Usually the
delirium resolves as the intoxication ends or within a few hours to days thereafter
(although the duration may be longer after intoxication with phencyclidine).
Delirium that is associated with Substance Withdrawal develops as tissue and fluid
concentrations of the substance decrease after reduction or termination of sustained,130
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
usually high-dose use of certain substances. The duration of the delirium tends to vary
with the half-life of the substance involved: longer-acting substances usually are
associated with more protracted withdrawal. Substance Withdrawal Delirium may
continue for only a few hours or may persist for as long as 2-4 weeks.
This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxication
or Substance Withdrawal only when the cognitive symptoms are in excess of those
usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when the
symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. For a
more detailed discussion of the features associated with Substance-Related Disorders,
see p. 175.
Recording Procedures
A diagnosis of Substance-Induced Delirium begins with the name of the specific
substance (rather than the class of substances) that is presumed to be causing the delirium
(e.g., "Diazepam" rather than "Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic"). The diagnostic code
is selected from the listing of classes of substances provided in the criteria set. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., digitalis), the code for "Other
Substance" should be used. In addition, for medications prescribed at therapeutic doses,
the specific medication can be indicated by listing the appropriate E-code (see Appendix
G). For substances that produce intoxication or withdrawal, the name of the substance
is followed by the context in which the symptoms developed (e.g., 292.81 Dextro-
amphetamine Intoxication Delirium; 291.0 Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium). For medica-
tion side effects and toxin exposure, the term "-Induced" is used (e.g., 292.81
Digitalis-Induced Delirium). When more than one substance is judged to play a
significant role in the development of the delirium, each should be listed separately. If
a substance is judged to be the etiological factor but the specific substance or class of
substances is unknown, the diagnosis is 292.81 Unknown Substance-Induced Delirium.
Specific Substances
Substance Intoxication Delirium can occur with the following classes of substances:
alcohol; amphetamines and related substances; cannabis; cocaine; hallucinogens; inhal-
ants; opioids; phencyclidine and related substances; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxioly-
tics; and other or unknown substances. Substance Withdrawal Delirium can occur
with the following classes of substances: alcohol (often called "delirium tremens");
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other or unknown substances.
Medications reported to cause delirium include anesthetics, analgesics, antiasthmatic
agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive and cardiovascular medi-
cations, antimicrobials, antiparkinsonian drugs, corticosteroids, gastrointestinal medica-
tions, muscle relaxants, and psychotropic medications with anticholinergic side effects.
Toxins reported to cause delirium include anticholinesterase, organophosphate insecti-
cides, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and volatile substances such as fuel or paint.
Differential
Diagnosis
See p. 126 for a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of delirium and p. 190
for a discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance Intoxication and Withdrawal.Delirium
131
I Diagnostic criteria for Substance Intoxication
Delirium
A. Disturbance of consciousness (i.e., reduced clarity of awareness of the
environment) with reduced ability to focus, sustain, or shift attention.
B. A change in cognition (such as memory deficit, disorientation, language
disturbance) or the development of a perceptual disturbance that is not
better accounted for by a preexisting, established, or evolving dementia.
C. The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to
days) and tends to fluctuate during the course of the day.
D. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of either (1) or (2):
(1) the symptoms in Criteria A and B developed during Substance
Intoxication
(2) medication use is etiologically related to the disturbance
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance
Intoxication only when the cognitive symptoms are in excess of those usually
associated with the intoxication syndrome and when the symptoms are
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Note: The diagnosis should be recorded as Substance-Induced Delirium if
related to medication use. Refer to Appendix G for E-codes indicating specific
medications.
Code [Specific Substance) Intoxication Delirium:
(291.0 Alcohol; 292.81 Amphetamine [or Amphetamine-Like Substance];
292.81 Cannabis; 292.81 Cocaine; 292.81 Hallucinogen; 292.81 Inhalant;
292.81 Opioid; 292.81 Phencyclidine [or Phencyclidine-Like Substance];
292.81 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic; 292.81 Other [or Unknown]
Substance [e.g., cimetidine, digitalis, benztropine])
Diagnostic criteria for Substance Withdrawal Delirium
A. Disturbance of consciousness (i.e., reduced clarity of awareness of the
environment) with reduced ability to focus, sustain, or shift attention.
B. A change in cognition (such as memory deficit, disorientation, language
disturbance) or the development of a perceptual disturbance that is not
better accounted for by a preexisting, established, or evolving dementia.
C. The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to
days) and tends to fluctuate during the course of the day.
(continued)132
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Substance Withdrawal Delirium
(continued)
D. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the symptoms in Criteria A and B developed during, or
shortly after, a withdrawal syndrome.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance
Withdrawal only when the cognitive symptoms are in excess of those usually
associated with the withdrawal syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently
severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Code (Specific Substance] Withdrawal Delirium:
(291.0 Alcohol; 292.81 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic; 292.81 Other [or
Unknown] Substance)
Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies
The Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies category is included to alert clinicians to the
common situation in which the delirium has more than one etiology. There may be more
than one general medical condition etiologically related to the delirium (e.g., Delirium
Due to Hepatic Encephalopathy, Delirium Due to Head Trauma), or the delirium may
be due to the combined effects of a general medical condition (e.g., viral encephalitis)
and substance use (e.g., Alcohol Withdrawal).
Recording Procedures
Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies does not have its own separate code and should
not be recorded as a diagnosis. For example, to code a delirium due to both hepatic
encephalopathy and withdrawal from alcohol, the clinician would list both 293-0
Delirium Due to Hepatic Encephalopathy and 291.0 Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium on
Axis I and 572.2 hepatic encephalopathy on Axis III.
Diagnostic criteria for Delirium Due to Multiple
Etiologies
A. Disturbance of consciousness (i.e., reduced clarity of awareness of the
environment) with reduced ability to focus, sustain, or shift attention.
B. A change in cognition (such as memory deficit, disorientation, language
disturbance) or the development of a perceptual disturbance that is not
better accounted for by a preexisting, established, or evolving dementia.
(continued)Dementia
133
D Diagnostic criteria for Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies
(continued)
C. The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to
days) and tends to fluctuate during the course of the day.
D. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the delirium has more than one etiology (e.g., more than
one etiological general medical condition, a general medical condition
plus Substance Intoxication or medication side effect).
Coding note: Use multiple codes reflecting specific delirium and specific etiolo-
gies, e.g., 293.0 Delirium Due to Viral Encephalitis; 291-0 Alcohol Withdrawal
Delirium.
780.09 Delirium Not Otherwise Specified
This category should be used to diagnose a delirium that does not meet criteria for any
of the specific types of delirium described in this section.
Examples include
1. A clinical presentation of delirium that is suspected to be due to a general medical
condition or substance use but for which there is insufficient evidence to establish
a specific etiology
2. Delirium due to causes not listed in this section (e.g., sensory deprivation)
Dementia
The disorders in the "Dementia" section are characterized by the development of multiple
cognitive deficits (including memory impairment) that are due to the direct physiological
effects of a general medical condition, to the persisting effects of a substance, or to
multiple etiologies (e.g., the combined effects of cerebro vascular disease and Alzheimer's
disease). The disorders in this section share a common symptom presentation but are
differentiated based on etiology. The diagnostic features listed in the next section pertain
to Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, Vascular Dementia, Dementia Due to HIV
Disease, Dementia Due to Head Trauma, Dementia Due to Parkinson's Disease,
Dementia Due to Huntingdon's Disease, Dementia Due to Pick's Disease, Demen-
tia Due to Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, Dementia Due to Other General Medical
Conditions, Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia, and Dementia Due to Mul-
tiple Etiologies. In addition, Dementia Not Otherwise Specified is included in this
section for presentations in which the clinician is unable to determine a specific etiology
for the multiple cognitive deficits.134
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a dementia is the development of multiple cognitive deficits that
include memory impairment and at least one of the following cognitive disturbances:
aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, or a disturbance in executive functioning. The cognitive
deficits must be sufficiently severe to cause impairment in occupational or social
functioning and must represent a decline from a previously higher level of functioning.
A diagnosis of a dementia should not be made if the cognitive deficits occur exclusively
during the course of a delirium. However, a dementia and a delirium may both be
diagnosed if the dementia is present at times when the delirium is not present. Dementia
may be etiologically related to a general medical condition, to the persisting effects of
substance use (including toxin exposure), or to a combination of these factors.
Memory impairment is required to make the diagnosis of a dementia and is a
prominent early symptom (Criterion Al). Individuals with dementia become impaired
in their ability to learn new material, or they forget previously learned material. Most
individuals with dementia have both forms of memory impairment, although it is
sometimes difficult to demonstrate the loss of previously learned material early in the
course of the disorder. They may lose valuables like wallets and keys, forget food
cooking on the stove, and become lost in unfamiliar neighborhoods. In advanced stages
of dementia, memory impairment is so severe that the person forgets his or her
occupation, schooling, birthday, family members, and sometimes even name.
Memory may be formally tested by asking the person to register, retain, recall, and
recognize information. The ability to learn new information may be assessed by asking
the individual to learn a list of words. The individual is requested to repeat the words
(registration), to recall the information after a delay of several minutes (retention, recall),
and to recognize the words from a multiple list (recognition). Individuals with difficulty
learning new information are not helped by clues or prompts (e.g., multiple-choice
questions) because they did not learn the material initially. In contrast, individuals with
primarily retrieval deficits can be helped by clues and prompts because their impairment
is in the ability to access their memories. Remote memory may be tested by asking the
individual to recall personal information or past material that the individual found of
interest (e.g., politics, sports, entertainment). It is also useful to determine (from the
individual and informants) the impact of the memory disturbances on the individual's
functioning (e.g., ability to work, shop, cook, pay bills, return home without getting lost).
Deterioration of language function (aphasia) may be manifested by difficulty
producing the names of individuals and objects (Criterion A2a). The speech of individuals
with aphasia may become vague or empty, with long circumlocutory phrases and
excessive use of terms of indefinite reference such as "thing" and "it." Comprehension
of spoken and written language and repetition of language may also be compromised.
In the advanced stages of dementia, individuals may be mute or have a deteriorated
speech pattern characterized by echolalia (i.e., echoing what is heard) or palilalia (i.e.,
repeating sounds or words over and over). Language is tested by asking the individual
to name objects in the room (e.g., tie, dress, desk, lamp) or body parts (e.g., nose, chin,
shoulder), follow commands ("Point at the door and then at the table"), or repeat phrases
("no ifs, ands, or buts").
Individuals with dementia may exhibit apraxia (i.e., impaired ability to execute motor
activities despite intact motor abilities, sensory function, and comprehension of the
required task) (Criterion A2b). They will be impaired in their ability to pantomime the
use of objects (e.g., combing hair) or to execute known motor acts (e.g., wavingDementia
135
goodbye). Apraxia may contribute to deficits in cooking, dressing, and drawing. Motor
skill disturbances may be tested by asking the individual to execute motor functions
(e.g., to show how to brush teeth, to copy intersecting pentagons, to assemble blocks,
or to arrange sticks in specific designs).
Individuals with dementia may exhibit agnosia (i.e., failure to recognize or identify
objects despite intact sensory function) (Criterion A2c). For example, the individual may
have normal visual acuity but lose the ability to recognize objects such as chairs or
pencils. Eventually they may be unable to recognize family members or even their own
reflection in the mirror. Similarly, they may have normal tactile sensation, but be unable
to identify objects placed in their hands by touch alone (e.g., a coin or keys).
Disturbances in executive functioning are a common manifestation of dementia
(Criterion A2d) and may be related especially to disorders of the frontal lobe or associated
subcortical pathways. Executive functioning involves the ability to think abstractly and
to plan, initiate, sequence, monitor, and stop complex behavior. Impairment in abstract
thinking may be manifested by the individual having difficulty coping with novel tasks
and avoiding situations that require the processing of new and complex information.
The ability to abstract can be formally assessed by asking the person to find similarities
or differences between related words. Executive dysfunction is also evident in a reduced
ability to shift mental sets, to generate novel verbal or nonverbal information, and to
execute serial motor activities. Tests for executive function include asking the individual
to count to 10, recite the alphabet, subtract serial 7s, state as many animals as possible
in 1 minute, or draw a continuous line consisting of alternating m's and n's. It is also useful
to determine (from the individual and informants) the impact of the disturbances in executive
functioning on the individual's daily life (e.g., ability to work, plan activities, budget).
The items in both Criterion Al (memory impairment) and Criterion A2 (aphasia,
apraxia, agnosia, or disturbance in executive functioning) must be severe enough to
cause significant impairment in social or occupational functioning (e.g., going to school,
working, shopping, dressing, bathing, handling finances, and other activities of daily
living) and must represent a decline from a previous level of functioning (Criterion B).
The nature and degree of impairment are variable and often depend on the particular
social setting of the individual. The same level of cognitive impairment may significantly
impair an individual's ability to perform a complex job, but not a job that is less
demanding. Standardized published rating scales that measure physical maintenance
(e.g., personal hygiene), intellectual functioning, and the ability to use implements or
tools (e.g., telephone, washing machine) can be used to measure the severity of
impairment.
Dementia is not diagnosed if these symptoms occur exclusively during the course
of a delirium. However, a delirium may be superimposed on a preexisting dementia, in
which case both diagnoses should be given.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with dementia
may become spatially disoriented and have difficulty with spatial tasks. Visuospatial
functioning can be assessed by asking the individual to copy drawings, such as a circle,
overlapping pentagons, and a cube. Poor judgment and poor insight are common in
dementia. Individuals may exhibit little or no awareness of memory loss or other
cognitive abnormalities. They may make unrealistic assessments of their abilities and136
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
make plans that are not congruent with their deficits and prognosis (e.g., planning to
start a new business). They may underestimate the risks involved in activities (e.g.,
driving). Occasionally, they may harm others by becoming violent. Suicidal behavior
may occur, particularly in early stages when the individual is more capable of carrying
out a plan of action. Dementia is sometimes accompanied by motor disturbances of gait
leading to falls. Some individuals with dementia show disinhibited behavior, including
making inappropriate jokes, neglecting personal hygiene, exhibiting undue familiarity
with strangers, or disregarding conventional rules of social conduct. Slurred speech may
occur in dementia that is associated with subcortical pathology such as Parkinson's
disease, Huntington's disease, and some cases of Vascular Dementia. The multiple
cognitive impairments of dementia are often associated with anxiety, mood, and sleep
disturbances. Delusions are common, especially those involving themes of persecution
(e.g., that misplaced possessions have been stolen). Hallucinations can occur in all
sensory modalities, but visual hallucinations are most common. Delirium is frequently
superimposed on dementia because the underlying brain disease may increase suscep-
tibility to confusional states that may be produced by medications or other concurrent
general medical conditions. Individuals with dementia may be especially vulnerable to
physical stressors (e.g., illness or minor surgery) and psychosocial stressors (e.g., going
to the hospital, bereavement), which may exacerbate their intellectual deficits and other
associated problems.
Associated laboratory findings. A discussion of associated laboratory findings that
are specific to types of dementia is included in the text for each dementia. Invariably
there are abnormalities in cognitive and memory functioning, which can be assessed
using mental status examinations and neuropsychological testing. Neuroimaging may
aid in the differential diagnosis of dementia. Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) may reveal cerebral atrophy, focal brain lesions (cortical
strokes, tumors, subdural hematomas), hydrocephalus, or periventricular ischemic brain
injury. Functional imaging such as positron-emission tomography (PET) or single photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) are not routinely used in the evaluation of
dementia, but may provide useful differential diagnostic information (e.g., parietal lobe
changes in Alzheimer's disease or frontal lobe alterations in frontal lobe degenerations)
in individuals without evidence of structural changes on CT or MRI scans.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
The associated physical examination findings of dementia depend on the nature,
location, and stage of progression of the underlying pathology. The most common cause
of dementia is Alzheimer's disease, followed by vascular disease, and then by multiple
etiologies. Other causes of dementia include Pick's disease, normal-pressure hydroceph-
alus, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, traumatic brain injury, brain tumors,
anoxia, infectious disorders (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV], syphilis), prion
diseases (e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease), endocrine conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism,
hypercalcemia, hypoglycemia), vitamin deficiencies (e.g., deficiencies of thiamine,
niacin, vitamin 612), immune disorders (e.g., polymyalgia rheumatica, systemic lupus
erythematosus), hepatic conditions, metabolic conditions (e.g., Kufs' disease, adreno-
leukodystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy, and other storage diseases of adult-
hood and childhood), and other neurological conditions (e.g., multiple sclerosis).Dementia
137
Specific Culture and Age Features
Cultural and educational background should be taken into consideration in the
evaluation of an individual's mental capacity. Individuals from certain backgrounds may
not be familiar with the information used in certain tests of general knowledge (e.g.,
names of presidents, geographical knowledge), memory (e.g., date of birth in cultures
that do not routinely celebrate birthdays), and orientation (e.g., sense of place and
location may be conceptualized differently in some cultures). The prevalence of different
causes of dementia (e.g., infections, nutritional deficiencies, traumatic brain injury,
endocrine conditions, cerebrovascular diseases, seizure disorders, brain tumors, sub-
stance abuse) varies substantially across cultural groups.
The age at onset of dementia depends on the etiology, but is usually late in life,
with highest prevalence above age 85 years. A significant deterioration in memory and
in multiple cognitive skills, which is necessary for the diagnosis of dementia, may be
difficult to document in very young children. Thus, the diagnosis of dementia may not
be practical until the child is older (usually between ages 4 and 6 years). In individuals
under age 18 years with Mental Retardation, an additional diagnosis of a dementia should
be made only if the condition is not characterized satisfactorily by the diagnosis of Mental
Retardation alone. Dementia is uncommon in children and adolescents, but can occur
as a result of general medical conditions (e.g., head injury, brain tumors, HIV infection,
strokes, adrenoleukodystrophies). Dementia in children may present as a deterioration
in functioning (as in adults) or as a significant delay or deviation in normal development.
Deteriorating school performance may be an early sign.
Prevalence
Reported prevalence of dementia varies among epidemiological studies, depending on
the ages of the subjects sampled; methods of determining the presence, severity, and
type of cognitive impairment; and the regions or countries studied. Community studies
estimated a 1-year prospective prevalence of almost 3.0% with severe cognitive
impairment in the adult population. The study assessed individuals with a brief
instrument that assessed current cognitive status (the Mini-Mental State Exam), which
does not identify specific diagnoses. It is estimated that 2%-4% of the population over
age 65 years have Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, with other types being much less
common. The prevalence of dementia, especially Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type and
Vascular Dementia, increases with age, particularly after age 75 years, with a prevalence
of 20% or more over age 85 years.
Course
Historically, the term dementia implied a progressive or irreversible course. The
DSM-IV definition of dementia, however, is based on the pattern of cognitive deficits
and carries no connotation concerning prognosis. Dementia may be progressive,
static, or remitting. The reversibility of a dementia is a function of the underlying
pathology and of the availability and timely application of effective treatment. The
mode of onset and subsequent course of dementia also depend on the underlying
etiology. The level of disability depends not only on the severity of the individual's
cognitive impairments but also on the available social supports. In advanced
dementia, the individual may become totally oblivious to his or her surroundings138
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
and require constant care. Individuals with severe dementia are susceptible to accidents
and infectious diseases, which often prove fatal.
Differential Diagnosis
Memory impairment occurs in both delirium and dementia. Delirium is also character-
ized by a reduced ability to maintain and shift attention appropriately. The clinical course
can help to differentiate between delirium and dementia. Typically, symptoms in
delirium fluctuate and symptoms in dementia are relatively stable. Multiple cognitive
impairments that persist in an unchanged form for more than a few months suggest
dementia rather than delirium. Delirium may be superimposed on a dementia, in which
case both disorders are diagnosed. In situations in which it is unclear whether the
cognitive deficits are due to a delirium or a dementia, it may be useful to make a
provisional diagnosis of delirium and observe the person carefully while continuing
efforts to identify the nature of the disturbance.
An amnestic disorder is characterized by severe memory impairment without other
significant impairments of cognitive functioning (i.e., aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, or
disturbances in executive functioning).
The presumed etiology determines the specific dementia diagnosis. If the clinician
has determined that the dementia is due to multiple etiologies, multiple codes based
on the specific dementias and their etiologies should be used (see Dementia Due to
Multiple Etiologies, p. 154). In Vascular Dementia, focal neurological signs (e.g.,
exaggeration of deep tendon reflexes, extensor plantar response) and laboratory
evidence of vascular disease judged to be related to the dementia are present. The clinical
course of Vascular Dementia is variable and typically progresses in stepwise fashion.
The presence of Dementia Due to Other General Medical Conditions (e.g., Pick's
disease, HIV) requires evidence from the history, physical examination, and appropriate
laboratory tests that a general medical condition is etiologically related to the dementia.
The onset of the deterioration (gradual or sudden) and its course (acute, subacute, or
chronic) may be useful in suggesting the etiology. For example, the severity of the
impairment in cognitive functioning often remains static after head injury, encephalitis,
or stroke.
Multiple cognitive deficits that occur only in the context of substance use are
diagnosed as Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal. If the dementia
results from the persisting effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or
toxin exposure), then Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia is diagnosed. Other
causes of dementia (e.g., Dementia Due to a General Medical Condition) should always
be considered, even in a person with Substance Dependence. For example, head injury
is not infrequent during substance use and may underlie the dementia. Dementia of
the Alzheimer's Type is currently a diagnosis of exclusion, and other causes for the
cognitive deficits (see above) must first be ruled out. In addition, the course is
characterized by gradual onset and continuing cognitive decline. In those cases in which
there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the dementia is due to a general
medical condition or is substance induced, Dementia Not Otherwise Specified should
be coded. Individuals may present with some but not all of the symptoms of dementia.
Such presentations should be coded as Cognitive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Mental Retardation is characterized by significantly subaverage current general
intellectual functioning, with concurrent impairments in adaptive functioning and withDementia
139
an onset before age 18 years. Mental Retardation is not necessarily associated with
memory impairment. In contrast, the age at onset of dementia is usually late in life. If
the onset of the dementia is before age 18 years, both dementia and Mental Retardation
may be diagnosed if the criteria for both disorders are met. Documenting a significant
deterioration in memory and in other cognitive skills, which is necessary for the diagnosis
of dementia, may be difficult in persons under age 4 years. In individuals under age 18
years, the diagnosis of dementia should be made only if the condition is not characterized
satisfactorily by the diagnosis of Mental Retardation alone.
Schizophrenia can also be associated with multiple cognitive impairments and a
decline in functioning, but Schizophrenia is unlike dementia in its generally earlier age
at onset, its characteristic symptom pattern, and the absence of a specific etiological
general medical condition or substance. Typically, the cognitive impairment associated
with Schizophrenia is less severe than that seen in Dementia.
Major Depressive Disorder may be associated with complaints of memory
impairment, difficulty thinking and concentrating, and an overall reduction in intellectual
abilities. Individuals sometimes perform poorly on mental status examinations and
neuropsychological testing. Particularly in elderly persons, it is often difficult to
determine whether cognitive symptoms are better accounted for by a dementia or by a
Major Depressive Episode. This differential diagnosis may be informed by a thorough
medical evaluation and an evaluation of the onset of the disturbance, the temporal
sequencing of depressive and cognitive symptoms, the course of illness, family history,
and treatment response. The premorbid state of the individual may help to differentiate
"pseudodementia" (i.e., cognitive impairments due to the Major Depressive Episode)
from dementia. In dementia, there is usually a premorbid history of declining cognitive
function, whereas the individual with a Major Depressive Episode is much more likely
to have a relatively normal premorbid state and abrupt cognitive decline associated with
the depression. If the clinician determines that both a dementia and Major Depressive
Disorder are present with independent etiologies, both should be diagnosed.
Dementia must be distinguished from Malingering and Factitious Disorder. The
patterns of cognitive deficits presented in Malingering and Factitious Disorder are usually
not consistent over time and are not characteristic of those typically seen in dementia.
For example, individuals with Factitious Disorder or Malingering manifesting as dementia
may perform calculations while keeping score during a card game, but then claim to be
unable to perform similar calculations during a mental status examination.
Dementia must be distinguished from the normal decline in cognitive functioning
that occurs with aging (as in Age-Related Cognitive Decline). The diagnosis of dementia
is warranted only if there is demonstrable evidence of greater memory and other
cognitive impairment than would be expected due to normal aging processes and the
symptoms cause impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type
Diagnostic Features
The cognitive deficits (Criterion A) and the required impairment (Criterion B) are
discussed on pp. 133-135. The onset of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type is gradual
and involves continuing cognitive decline (Criterion C). Because of the difficulty of
obtaining direct pathological evidence of the presence of Alzheimer's disease, the
diagnosis can be made only when other etiologies for the dementia have been ruled140
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
out. Specifically, the cognitive deficits are not due to other central nervous system
conditions that cause progressive deficits in memory or cognition (e.g., cerebrovascular
disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease), systemic conditions that are known
to cause dementia (e.g., hypothyroidism, vitamin B 12 deficiency, HIV infection), or the
persisting effects of a substance (e.g., alcohol) (Criterion D). If there is an additional
etiology (e.g., head trauma worsening a Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type), both types
of dementia should be coded (see Dementia Due to Multiple Etiologies, p. 154).
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type should not be diagnosed if the symptoms occur
exclusively during delirium (Criterion E). However, delirium may be superimposed on
a preexisting Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, in which case the With Delirium subtype
should be indicated. Finally, the cognitive deficits are not better accounted for by another
Axis I disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder or Schizophrenia) (Criterion F).
Subtypes and Specifiers
The age at onset of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type can be indicated by the use of
one of the following subtypes:
With Early Onset. This subtype is used if the onset of the dementia is age
65 years or under.
With Late Onset. This subtype is used if the onset of the dementia is after age
65 years.
The following subtypes (each of which has its own separate code) must be used to
indicate the predominant feature of the current clinical presentation:
With Delirium. This subtype is used if delirium is superimposed on the
dementia.
With Delusions. This subtype is used if delusions are the predominant feature.
With Depressed Mood. This subtype is used if depressed mood (including
presentations that meet symptom criteria for a Major Depressive Episode) is the
predominant feature. A separate diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition is not given.
Uncomplicated. This subtype is used if none of the above predominates in the
current clinical presentation.
The specifier With Behavioral Disturbance (which cannot be coded) can also be
used to indicate clinically significant behavioral disturbances (e.g., wandering).
Recording Procedures
By ICD-9-CM convention, only Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type and Vascular Dementia
have codable subtypes. The diagnostic codes are selected as follows:
• For Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset, the code depends on
the subtype for predominant features: 290.11 for With Delirium, 290.12 for With
Delusions, 290.13 for With Depressed Mood, 290.10 for Uncomplicated.
• For Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, the code also depends
on the subtype for predominant features: 290.3 for With Delirium, 290.20 for With
Delusions, 290.21 for With Depressed Mood, and 290.0 for Uncomplicated.Dementia
141
The specifier With Behavioral Disturbance is uncoded and can be applied to each
of the above subtypes (e.g., 290.21 Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset,
With Depressed Mood, With Behavioral Disturbance). In addition, 331.0 Alzheimer's
disease should be coded on Axis III.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. See p. 135 for a general
discussion of features and disorders associated with dementia. The prevalence of
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type is increased in individuals with Down's syndrome
and in individuals with a history of head trauma. Pathological changes that are
characteristic of Alzheimer's disease are present in the brains of individuals with Down's
syndrome by the time they are in their early 40s, although the clinical symptoms of
dementia are not usually evident until later.
Associated laboratory findings. In the majority of cases, brain atrophy is present
in Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, with wider cortical sulci and larger cerebral
ventricles than would be expected given the normal aging process. This may be
demonstrated by computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Microscopic examination usually reveals histopathological changes, including senile
plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, granulovascular degeneration, neuronal loss, astrocytic
gliosis, and amyloid angiopathy. Lewy bodies are sometimes seen in the cortical neurons.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
In
the first years of illness, few motor and sensory signs are associated with Dementia of
the Alzheimer's Type. Later in the course, myoclonus and gait disorder may appear.
Seizures occur in approximately 10% of individuals with the disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
See p. 137 for a general discussion of culture and age features associated with dementia.
Late onset (after age 65 years) of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type is much more
common than early onset. Few cases develop before age 50 years. The disorder is slightly
more common in females than in males.
Prevalence
Between 2% and 4% of the population over age 65 years is estimated to have Dementia
of the Alzheimer's Type. The prevalence increases with increasing age, particularly after
age 75 years.
Course
See p. 137 for a general discussion of the course of dementia. The course of Dementia
of the Alzheimer's Type tends to be slowly progressive, with a loss of 3-4 points per
year on a standard assessment instrument such as the Mini-Mental State Exam. Various
patterns of deficits are seen. A common pattern is an insidious onset, with early deficits
in recent memory followed by the development of aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia after
several years. Some individuals may show personality changes or increased irritability142
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
in the early stages. In the later stages of the disease, individuals may develop gait and
motor disturbances and eventually become mute and bedridden. The average duration
of the illness from onset of symptoms to death is 8-10 years.
Familial Pattern
Compared with the general population, first-degree biological relatives of individuals
with Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset, are more likely to develop
the disorder. Late-onset cases may also have a genetic component. Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type in some families has been shown to be inherited as a dominant trait
with linkage to several chromosomes, including chromosomes 21, 14, and 19. However,
the proportion of cases that are related to specific inherited abnormalities is not known.
Differential Diagnosis
See p. 138 for a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of dementia.
Diagnostic criteria for Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type
A. The development of multiple cognitive deficits manifested by both
(1) memory impairment (impaired ability to learn new information or
to recall previously learned information)
(2) one (or more) of the following cognitive disturbances:
(a) aphasia (language disturbance)
(b) apraxia (impaired ability to carry out motor activities despite
intact motor function)
(c) agnosia (failure to recognize or identify objects despite intact
sensory function)
(d) disturbance in executive functioning (i.e., planning, organiz-
ing, sequencing, abstracting)
B. The cognitive deficits in Criteria Al and A2 each cause significant
impairment in social or occupational functioning and represent a
significant decline from a previous level of functioning.
C. The course is characterized by gradual onset and continuing cognitive
decline.
D. The cognitive deficits in Criteria Al and A2 are not due to any of the
following:
(1) other central nervous system conditions that cause progressive
deficits in memory and cognition (e.g., cerebrovascular disease,
Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, subdural hematoma,
normal-pressure hydrocephalus, brain tumor)
(continued)Dementia
143
D Diagnostic criteria for Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type
(continued)
(2) systemic conditions that are known to cause dementia (e.g.,
hypothyroidism, vitamin Biz or folic acid deficiency, niacin defi-
ciency, hypercalcemia, neurosyphilis, HIV infection)
(3) substance-induced conditions
E. The deficits do not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
F. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another Axis I disorder
(e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Schizophrenia).
Code based on type of onset and predominant features:
With Early Onset: if onset is at age 65 years or below
290.11 With Delirium: if delirium is superimposed on the dementia
290.12 With Delusions: if delusions are the predominant feature
290.13 With Depressed Mood: if depressed mood (including presen-
tations that meet full symptom criteria for a Major Depressive Episode)
is the predominant feature. A separate diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition is not given.
290.10 Uncomplicated: if none of the above predominates in the
current clinical presentation
With Late Onset: if onset is after age 65 years
290.3 With Delirium: if delirium is superimposed on the dementia
290.20 With Delusions: if delusions are the predominant feature
290.21 With Depressed Mood: if depressed mood (including pre-
sentations that meet full symptom criteria for a Major Depressive
Episode) is the predominant feature. A separate diagnosis of Mood
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not given.
290.0 Uncomplicated: if none of the above predominates in the
current clinical presentation
Specify if:
With Behavioral Disturbance
Coding note: Also code 331.0 Alzheimer's disease on Axis III.
290.4x Vascular Dementia
(formerly y Multi-Infarct Dementia)
Diagnostic Features
The cognitive deficits (Criterion A) and the required impairment (Criterion B) in Vascular
Dementia are discussed on pp. 133-135. There must be evidence of cerebrovascular
disease (i.e., focal neurological signs and symptoms or laboratory evidence) that is144
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
judged to be etiologically related to the dementia (Criterion C). The focal neurological
signs and symptoms include extensor plantar response, pseudobulbar palsy, gait
abnormalities, exaggeration of deep tendon reflexes, or weakness of an extremity.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) usually
demonstrate multiple vascular lesions of the cerebral cortex and subcortical structures.
Vascular Dementia is not diagnosed if the symptoms occur exclusively during delirium
(Criterion D). However, delirium may be superimposed on a preexisting Vascular
Dementia, in which case the subtype With Delirium should be indicated.
Subtypes
The following subtypes (each of which has its own separate code) must be used to
indicate the predominant feature of the current clinical presentation:
With Delirium. This subtype is used if delirium is superimposed on the
dementia.
With Delusions. This subtype is used if delusions are the predominant feature.
With Depressed Mood. This subtype is used if depressed mood (including
presentations that meet symptom criteria for a Major Depressive Episode) is the
predominant feature. A separate diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition is not given.
Uncomplicated. This subtype is used if none of the above predominates in the
current clinical presentation.
The specifier With Behavioral Disturbance (which cannot be coded) can also be
used to indicate clinically significant behavioral disturbances (e.g., wandering).
Recording Procedures
By ICD-9-CM convention, only Vascular Dementia and Dementia of the Alzheimer's
Type have codable subtypes. The diagnostic codes for Vascular Dementia depend on
the subtype for predominant features: 290.41 for With Delirium, 290.42 for With
Delusions, 290.43 for With Depressed Mood, 290.40 for Uncomplicated. The specifier
With Behavioral Disturbance is uncoded and can be applied to each of the above
subtypes (e.g., 290.43 Vascular Dementia, With Depressed Mood, With Behavioral
Disturbance). In addition, the cerebrovascular condition (e.g., 436 stroke) should be
coded on Axis III.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. See p. 135 for a general
discussion of features and disorders associated with dementia.
Associated laboratory findings. The extent of central nervous system lesions de-
tected by CT and MRI in Vascular Dementia typically exceeds the extent of changes
detected in the brains of healthy elderly persons (e.g., periventricular and white matter
hyperintensities noted on MRI scans). Lesions often appear in both white matter and
gray matter structures, including subcortical regions and nuclei. Evidence of old
infarctions (e.g., focal atrophy) may be detected, as well as findings of more recentDementia
145
disease. EEG findings may reflect focal lesions in the brain. In addition, there may be
laboratory evidence of associated cardiac and systemic vascular conditions (e.g., EGG
abnormalities, laboratory evidence of renal failure).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Common neurological signs (e.g., abnormal reflexes, weakness of an extremity, gait
disturbance) are discussed in the "Diagnostic Features" section. There is often evidence
of longstanding arterial hypertension (e.g., funduscopic abnormalities, enlarged heart),
valvular heart disease (e.g., abnormal heart sounds), or extracranial vascular disease that
may be sources of cerebral emboli. A single stroke may cause a relatively circumscribed
change in mental state (e.g., an aphasia following damage to the left hemisphere, or an
amnestic disorder from infarction in the distribution of the posterior cerebral arteries),
but generally does not cause Vascular Dementia, which typically results from the
occurrence of multiple strokes, usually at different times.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
See p. 137 for a general discussion of culture and age features of dementia.
The onset of Vascular Dementia is typically earlier than that of Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type. The disorder is apparently more common in males than in females.
Prevalence
Vascular Dementia is reportedly much less common than Dementia of the Alzheimer's
Type.
Course
See p. 137 for a general discussion of the course of dementia.
The onset of Vascular Dementia is typically abrupt, followed by a stepwise and
fluctuating course that is characterized by rapid changes in functioning rather than slow
progression. The course, however, may be highly variable, and an insidious onset with
gradual decline is also encountered. Usually the pattern of deficits is "patchy," depending
on which regions of the brain have been destroyed. Certain cognitive functions may be
affected early, whereas others remain relatively unimpaired. Early treatment of hyper-
tension and vascular disease may prevent further progression.
Differential Diagnosis
See p. 138 for a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of dementia.146
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
• Diagnostic criteria for 290Ax Vascular Dementia
A. The development of multiple cognitive deficits manifested by both
(1) memory impairment (impaired ability to learn new information or
to recall previously learned information)
(2) one (or more) of the following cognitive disturbances:
(a) aphasia (language disturbance)
(b) apraxia (impaired ability to carry out motor activities despite
intact motor function)
(c) agnosia (failure to recognize or identify objects despite intact
sensory function)
(d) disturbance in executive functioning (i.e., planning, organiz-
ing, sequencing, abstracting)
B. The cognitive deficits in Criteria Al and A2 each cause significant
impairment in social or occupational functioning and represent a
significant decline from a previous level of functioning.
C. Focal neurological signs and symptoms (e.g., exaggeration of deep
tendon reflexes, extensor plantar response, pseudobulbar palsy, gait
abnormalities, weakness of an extremity) or laboratory evidence indic-
ative of cerebrovascular disease (e.g., multiple infarctions involving
cortex and underlying white matter) that are judged to be etiologically
related to the disturbance.
D. The deficits do not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
Code based on predominant features:
290.41 With Delirium: if delirium is superimposed on the dementia
290.42 With Delusions: if delusions are the predominant feature
290.43 With Depressed Mood: if depressed mood (including
presentations that meet full symptom criteria for a Major Depressive
Episode) is the predominant feature. A separate diagnosis of Mood
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not given.
290.40 Uncomplicated: if none of the above predominates in the
current clinical presentation
Specify if:
With Behavioral Disturbance
Coding note: Also code cerebrovascular condition on Axis III.
Dementia Due to Other General Medical Conditions
Diagnostic Features
The cognitive deficits (Criterion A) and the required impairment (Criterion B) of
Dementia Due to Other General Medical Conditions are discussed on pp. 133-135. ThereDementia
147
must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that a
general medical condition is etiologically related to the dementia (e.g., infection with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), traumatic brain injury, Parkinson's disease,
Huntington's disease, Pick's disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, normal-pressure hydro-
cephalus, hypothyroidism, brain tumor, or vitamin B 12 deficiency) (Criterion C). Demen-
tia Due to a General Medical Condition is not diagnosed if the symptoms occur
exclusively during delirium (Criterion D). However, delirium may be superimposed on
a preexisting Dementia Due to a General Medical Condition, in which case both
diagnoses should be given.
In determining whether the dementia is due to a general medical condition, the
clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition. Further, the
clinician must establish that the dementia is etiologically related to the general medical
condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and comprehensive assessment
of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment. Although there are no infallible
guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the dementia and the
general medical condition is etiological, several considerations provide some guidance
in this area. One consideration is the presence of a temporal association between the
onset or exacerbation of the general medical condition and that of the cognitive deficits.
Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct association between
the general medical condition in question and the development of a dementia can
provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular situation. In addition, the
clinician must also judge that the disturbance is not better accounted for by Dementia
of the Alzheimer's Type, Vascular Dementia, a Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia,
or another mental disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder). These determinations are
explained in greater detail in the "Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition"
section (p. 165).
See p. 135 for a general discussion of the features and disorders associated with
dementia.
Recording Procedures
Specific codes are available for some of the Dementias Due to a General Medical
Condition (see criteria set). The diagnostic codes and terms are selected depending on
the specific etiological condition (e.g., 294.1 Dementia Due to Parkinson's disease). The
etiological condition (e.g., 332.0 Parkinson's Disease) should also be recorded on Axis
III. An "other" category (coded 294.1) is included for etiological conditions not
specifically listed and is recorded by noting both the dementia and the specific etiological
condition (e.g., 294.1 Dementia Due to Hypothyroidism) on Axis I. The ICD-9-CM code
for the etiological condition should also be noted on Axis III (e.g., 244.9 hypothyroidism).
(See Appendix G for a list of selected ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for general medical
conditions.)
In an individual with an established history of a dementia, a superimposed Delirium
Due to a General Medical Condition should be noted by coding both the dementia and
the delirium on Axis I (e.g., 294.1 Dementia Due to Parkinson's Disease and 293.0
Delirium Due to Hepatic Encephalopathy). This is in contrast to Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type and Vascular Dementia, in which the With Delirium subtype is
specified.148
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
294.9 Dementia Due to HIV Disease
The essential feature of Dementia Due to HIV Disease is the presence of a dementia
that is judged to be the direct pathophysiological consequence of human immunodefici-
ency virus (HIV) disease. Neuropathological findings most commonly involve diffuse,
multifocal destruction of the white matter and subcortical structures. The spinal fluid
may show normal or slightly elevated protein and a mild lymphocytosis, and HIV can
usually be isolated directly from cerebrospinal fluid. Dementia that is associated with
direct HIV infection of the central nervous system is typically characterized by forgetful-
ness, slowness, poor concentration, and difficulties with problem solving. Behavioral
manifestations most commonly include apathy and social withdrawal, and occasionally
these may be accompanied by delirium, delusions, or hallucinations. Tremor, impaired
rapid repetitive movements, imbalance, ataxia, hypertonia, generalized hyperreflexia,
positive frontal release signs, and impaired pursuit and saccadic eye movements may
be present on physical examination. Children may also develop Dementia Due to HIV
Disease, typically manifested by developmental delay, hypertonia, microcephaly, and
basal ganglia calcification. Dementia in association with HIV infection may also result
from accompanying central nervous system tumors (e.g., primary central nervous system
lymphoma) and from opportunistic infections (e.g., toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus
infection, cryptococcosis, tuberculosis, and syphilis), in which case the appropriate type
of dementia should be diagnosed (e.g., 294.1 Dementia Due to Toxoplasmosis). Unusual
systemic infections (e.g., Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia) or neoplasms (e.g., Kaposi's
sarcoma) may also be present.
294.1 Dementia Due to Head Trauma
The essential feature of Dementia Due to Head Trauma is the presence of a dementia
that is judged to be the direct pathophysiological consequence of head trauma. The
degree and type of cognitive impairments or behavioral disturbances depend on the
location and extent of the brain injury. Posttraumatic amnesia is frequently present, along
with persisting memory impairment. A variety of other behavioral symptoms may be
evident, with or without the presence of motor or sensory deficits. These symptoms
include aphasia, attentional problems, irritability, anxiety, depression or affective lability,
apathy, increased aggression, or other changes in personality. Alcohol or other Substance
Intoxication is often present in individuals with acute head injuries, and concurrent
Substance Abuse or Dependence may be present. Head injury occurs most often in
young males and has been associated with risk-taking behaviors. When it occurs in the
context of a single injury, Dementia Due to Head Trauma is usually nonprogressive, but
repeated head injury (e.g., from boxing) may lead to a progressive dementia (so called
dementia pugilistica). A single head trauma that is followed by a progressive decline in
cognitive function should raise the possibility of another superimposed process such as
hydrocephalus or a Major Depressive Episode.
294.1 Dementia Due to Parkinson's Disease
The essential feature of Dementia Due to Parkinson's Disease is the presence of a
dementia that is judged to be the direct pathophysiological consequence of Parkinson's
disease. Parkinson's disease is a slowly progressive neurological condition, characterizedDementia
149
by tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability. Dementia has been reported
to occur in approximately 20%-60% of individuals with Parkinson's disease and is more
likely to be present in older individuals or those with more severe or advanced disease.
The dementia associated with Parkinson's disease is characterized by cognitive and
motoric slowing, executive dysfunction, and impairment in memory retrieval. Declining
cognitive performance in individuals with Parkinson's disease is frequently exacerbated
by depression. Findings on physical examination include the characteristic abnormal
motor signs of resting tremor, evidence of slowness and poverty of movement (such as
micrographia), or muscular rigidity and loss of associated movements. At autopsy,
neuronal loss and Lewy bodies are evident in the substantia nigra. There are a number
of syndromes that may manifest with dementia, parkinsonian movement disorders, and
additional neurological features (e.g., progressive supranuclear palsy, olivoponto-
cerebellar degeneration, and Vascular Dementia). Some individuals with Parkinson's
disease and dementia are found at autopsy to have coexisting neuropathology indicative
of Alzheimer's disease or of diffuse Lewy body disease.
294.1 Dementia Due to Huntington's Disease
The essential feature of Dementia Due to Huntington's Disease is the presence of a
dementia that is judged to be the direct pathophysiological consequence of Huntington's
disease. Huntington's disease is an inherited progressive degenerative disease of
cognition, emotion, and movement. The disease affects men and women equally and is
transmitted by a single autosomal dominant gene on the short arm of chromosome 4.
The disease is usually diagnosed in the late 30s to early 40s but may begin as early as
age 4 years in the juvenile form or as late as age 85 years in the late-onset form. The
onset of Huntington's disease is often heralded by insidious changes in behavior and
personality, including depression, irritability, and anxiety. Some individuals present with
abnormalities of movement that resemble increased fidgeting and that later progress to
characteristic generalized choreoathetosis. Difficulties with memory retrieval, executive
functioning, and judgment are common early in the course, with more severe memory
deficits occurring as the disease progresses. Disorganized speech and psychotic features
are sometimes present. Late in the disease, characteristic "boxcar ventricles" may be seen
on structural brain imaging due to the atrophy of the striatum. Positron-emission
tomography (PET) may show striatal hypometabolism early in the disease. Offspring of
individuals with Huntington's disease have a 50% chance of developing the disease. A
genetic test is available to determine with relative certainty whether a given at-risk
individual is likely to develop the disease; however, such testing may be best adminis-
tered by centers with experience in counseling and follow-up of individuals at risk for
Huntington's disease.
290.10 Dementia Due to Pick's Disease
The essential feature of Dementia Due to Pick's Disease is the presence of a dementia
that is judged to be the direct pathophysiological consequence of Pick's disease. Pick's
disease is a degenerative disease of the brain that particularly affects the frontal and
temporal lobes. As in other frontal lobe dementias, Pick's disease is characterized150
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
clinically by changes in personality early in the course, deterioration of social skills,
emotional blunting, behavioral disinhibition, and prominent language abnormalities.
Difficulties with memory, apraxia, and other features of dementia usually follow later in
the course. Prominent primitive reflexes (snout, suck, grasp) may be present. As the
dementia progresses, it may be accompanied by either apathy or extreme agitation.
Individuals may develop such severe problems in language, attention, or behavior that
it may be difficult to assess their degree of cognitive impairment. Structural brain imaging
typically reveals prominent frontal and/or temporal atrophy, and functional brain
imaging may localize frontotemporal hypometabolism, even in the absence of clear
structural atrophy. The disorder most commonly manifests itself in individuals between
ages 50 and 60 years, although it can occur among older individuals. Pick's disease is
one of the pathologically distinct etiologies among the heterogeneous group of
dementing processes that are associated with frontotemporal brain atrophy. The specific
diagnosis of a frontal lobe dementia such as Pick's disease is usually established at
autopsy with the pathological finding of characteristic intraneuronal argentophilic Pick
inclusion bodies. Clinically, Pick's disease often cannot be distinguished with certainty
from atypical cases of Alzheimer's disease or from other dementias that affect the frontal
lobes.
290.10 Dementia Due to Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
The essential feature of Dementia Due to Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease is the presence of
a dementia that is judged to be the direct pathophysiological consequence of Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease. Jacob-Creutzfeldt disease is one of the subacute spongiform encephalop-
athies, a group of central nervous system diseases caused by transmissible agents known
as "slow viruses" or prions. Typically, individuals with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease manifest
the clinical triad of dementia, involuntary movements (particularly myoclonus), and
periodic EEC activity. However, up to 25% of individuals with the disorder may have
atypical presentations, and the disease can be confirmed only by biopsy or at autopsy
with the demonstration of spongiform neuropathological changes. Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease may develop at any age in adults, but most typically when they are between
ages 40 and 60 years. From 5% to 15% of cases may have a familial component. Prodromal
symptoms of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease may include fatigue, anxiety, or problems with
appetite, sleeping, or concentration and may be followed after several weeks by
incoordination, altered vision, or abnormal gait or other movements that may be
myoclonic, choreoathetoid, or ballistic, along with a rapidly progressive dementia. The
disease typically progresses very rapidly over several months, although more rarely it
can progress over years and appear similar in its course to other dementias. There are
no distinctive findings on cerebrospinal fluid analysis, and nonspecific atrophy may be
apparent on neuroimaging. In most individuals, the EEC typically reveals periodic sharp,
often triphasic and synchronous discharges at a rate of 0.5-2 Hz at some point during
the course of the disorder. The transmissible agent thought to be responsible for
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is resistant to boiling, formalin, alcohol, and ultraviolet
radiation, but it can be inactivated by pressured autoclaving or by bleach. Transmission
by corneal transplantation and human growth factor injection has been documented,
and anecdotal cases of transmission to health care workers have been reported.
Therefore, when neurosurgery, brain biopsy, or brain autopsy is undertaken,Dementia
151
universal precautions should be taken with both tissue and equipment that comes in
contact with tissue.
294.1 Dementia Due to
Other General Medical Conditions
In addition to the specific categories described above, a number of other general medical
conditions can cause dementia. These conditions include structural lesions (primary or
secondary brain tumors, subdural hematoma, slowly progressive or normal-pressure
hydrocephalus), endocrine conditions (hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia, hypoglycemia),
nutritional conditions (deficiencies of thiamine, niacin, and vitamin B 12 ), other infectious
conditions (neurosyphilis, cryptococcosis), derangements of renal and hepatic function,
and other neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis. Unusual causes of central
nervous system injury, such as electrical shock or intracranial radiation, are generally
evident from the history. Rare disorders such as the childhood and adult storage diseases
have a distinctive family history or clinical presentation. Associated physical examination
and laboratory findings and other clinical features depend on the nature and severity of
the general medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
See p. 138 for a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of dementia.
Diagnostic criteria for Dementia Due to Other
General Medical Conditions
A. The development of multiple cognitive deficits manifested by both
(1) memory impairment (impaired ability to learn new information or
to recall previously learned information)
(2) one (or more) of the following cognitive disturbances:
(a) aphasia (language disturbance)
(b) apraxia (impaired ability to carry out motor activities despite
intact motor function)
(c) agnosia (failure to recognize or identify objects despite intact
sensory function)
(d) disturbance in executive functioning (i.e., planning, organiz-
ing, sequencing, abstracting)
B. The cognitive deficits in Criteria Al and A2 each cause significant
impairment in social or occupational functioning and represent a
significant decline from a previous level of functioning.
(continued)152
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Dementia Due to Other General
Medical Conditions (continued)
C. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
one of the general medical conditions listed below.
D. The deficits do not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
• 294.9 Dementia Due to HIV Disease
Coding note: Also code 043.1 HIV infection affecting central nervous system on
Axis III.
• 294.1 Dementia Due to Head Trauma
Coding note: Also code 854.00 head injury on Axis III.
• 294.1 Dementia Due to Parkinson's Disease
Coding note: Also code 332.0 Parkinson's disease on Axis III.
• 294.1 Dementia Due to Huntington's Disease
Coding note: Also code 333.4 Huntington's disease on Axis III.
• 290.10 Dementia Due to Pick's Disease
Coding note: Also code 331.1 Pick's disease on Axis III.
• 290.10 Dementia Due to Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
Coding note: Also code 046.1 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease on Axis III.
• 294.1 Dementia Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition not listed above}
For example, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, hypothyroidism, brain
tumor, vitamin 612 deficiency, intracranial radiation
Coding note: Also code the general medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix
G for codes).
Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia
Diagnostic and Associated Features
The cognitive deficits (Criterion A) and the required impairment (Criterion B) are
discussed on pp. 133-135. Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia is not diagnosed if
the symptoms persist beyond the usual duration of Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal
or if they occur exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion C). However,
delirium may be superimposed on a preexisting Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia,Dementia
153
in which case both diagnoses should be given. There must be evidence from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory findings that the deficits are etiologically related to
the persisting effects of substance use (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, toxin
exposure) (Criterion D). This disorder is termed "persisting" because the dementia
persists long after the individual has experienced the effects of Substance Intoxication
or Substance Withdrawal.
Features that are associated with Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia are those
associated with dementias generally (see p. 135). Even if currently abstinent from
substance use, most individuals with this disorder have previously had a pattern of
prolonged and heavy substance use that met criteria for Substance Dependence. Because
these disorders persist long after use of the substance has stopped, blood or urine screens
may be negative for the etiological substance. The age at onset of Substance-Induced
Persisting Dementia is rarely before age 20 years. This disorder usually has an insidious
onset and slow progression, typically during a period when the person qualifies for a
Substance Dependence diagnosis. The deficits are usually permanent and may worsen
even if the substance use stops, although some cases do show improvement.
For a more detailed discussion of the features associated with Substance-Related
Disorders, see p. 175.
Recording Procedures
The name of the diagnosis begins with the specific substance (e.g., alcohol) that is
presumed to have caused the dementia. The diagnostic code is selected from the listing
of classes of substances provided in the criteria set. For substances that do not fit into
any of the classes, the code for "Other Substance" should be used. In addition, for
medications prescribed at therapeutic doses, the specific medication can be indicated
by listing the appropriate E-code (see Appendix G). When more than one substance is
judged to play a significant role in the development of the persisting dementia, each
should be listed separately (e.g., 291.2 Alcohol-Induced Persisting Dementia; 292.82
Inhalant-Induced Persisting Dementia). If a substance is judged to be the etiological
factor, but the specific substance or class of substances is unknown, the diagnosis is
292.82 Unknown Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia.
Specific Substances
Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia can occur in association with the following
classes of substances: alcohol; inhalants; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; or other
or unknown substances. Medications reported to cause dementia include anticonvulsants
and intrathecal methotrexate. Toxins reported to evoke symptoms of dementia include
lead, mercury, carbon monoxide, organophosphate insecticides, and industrial solvents.
Differential
Diagnosis
See p. 138 for a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of dementia.154
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced
Persisting Dementia
A. The development of multiple cognitive deficits manifested by both
(1) memory impairment (impaired ability to learn new information or
to recall previously learned information)
(2) one (or more) of the following cognitive disturbances:
(a) aphasia (language disturbance)
(b) apraxia (impaired ability to carry out motor activities despite
intact motor function)
(c) agnosia (failure to recognize or identify objects despite intact
sensory function)
(d) disturbance in executive functioning (i.e., planning, organiz-
ing, sequencing, abstracting)
B. The cognitive deficits in Criteria Al and A2 each cause significant
impairment in social or occupational functioning and represent a
significant decline from a previous level of functioning.
C. The deficits do not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium
and persist beyond the usual duration of Substance Intoxication or
Withdrawal.
D. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the deficits are etiologically related to the persisting effects
of substance use (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).
Code [Specific Substancej-Induced Persisting Dementia:
(291.2 Alcohol; 292.82 Inhalant; 292.82 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic;
292.82 Other [or Unknown] Substance)
Dementia Due to Multiple Etiologies
The Dementia Due to Multiple Etiologies category is included to alert clinicians to the
common situation in which the dementia has more than one etiology. More than one
general medical condition may be etiologically related to the dementia (e.g., Dementia
of the Alzheimer's Type and Dementia Due to Head Trauma), or the dementia may be
due to the combined effects of a general medical condition (e.g., Parkinson's disease)
and the long-term use of a substance (e.g., Alcohol-Induced Persisting Dementia).
Recording Procedures
Dementia Due to Multiple Etiologies does not have its own separate code and should
not be recorded as a diagnosis. For example, both Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type
and Vascular Dementia should be diagnosed for an individual with Dementia of theDementia
155
Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, Uncomplicated, who, over the course of several
strokes, develops a significant further decline in cognitive functioning. In this example,
the clinician would list both 290.0 Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset,
Uncomplicated, and 290.40, Vascular Dementia, Uncomplicated, on Axis I, and 331.0
Alzheimer's Disease and 436 Stroke on Axis III.
Diagnostic criteria for Dementia Due to
Multiple Etiologies
A. The development of multiple cognitive deficits manifested by both
(1) memory impairment (impaired ability to learn new information or
to recall previously learned information)
(2) one (or more) of the following cognitive disturbances:
(a) aphasia (language disturbance)
(b) apraxia (impaired ability to carry out motor activities despite
intact motor function)
(c) agnosia (failure to recognize or identify objects despite intact
sensory function)
(d) disturbance in executive functioning (i.e., planning, organiz-
ing, sequencing, abstracting)
B. The cognitive deficits in Criteria Al and A2 each cause significant
impairment in social or occupational functioning and represent a
significant decline from a previous level of functioning.
C. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance has more than one etiology (e.g., head
trauma plus chronic alcohol use, Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type with
the subsequent development of Vascular Dementia).
D. The deficits do not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
Coding note: Use multiple codes based on specific dementias and specific
etiologies, e.g., 290.0 Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, Uncom-
plicated; 290.40 Vascular Dementia, Uncomplicated.
294.8 Dementia Not Otherwise Specified
This category should be used to diagnose a dementia that does not meet criteria for any
of the specific types described in this section.
An example is a clinical presentation of dementia for which there is insufficient
evidence to establish a specific etiology.156
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
Amnestic Disorders
The disorders in the "Amnestic Disorders" section are characterized by a disturbance in
memory that is either due to the direct physiological effects of a general medical
condition or due to the persisting effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a
medication, or toxin exposure). The disorders in this section share the common symptom
presentation of memory impairment, but are differentiated based on etiology. The
diagnostic features listed below pertain to Amnestic Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition (e.g., physical trauma and vitamin deficiency) and Substance-
Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (including medication side effects). In addi-
tion, Amnestic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included in this section for
presentations in which the clinician is unable to determine a specific etiology for the
memory disturbance. Text and criteria for Dissociative Disorders involving memory loss
are not included here and instead are contained in the Dissociative Disorders section (see
p. 477).
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with an amnestic disorder are impaired in their ability to learn new
information or are unable to recall previously learned information or past events
(Criterion A). The memory disturbance must be sufficiently severe to cause marked
impairment in social or occupational functioning and must represent a significant decline
from a previous level of functioning (Criterion B). The memory disturbance must not
occur exclusively during the course of a delirium or a dementia (Criterion C). The ability
to learn and recall new information is always affected in an amnestic disorder, whereas
problems remembering previously learned information occur more variably, depending
on the location and severity of brain damage. The memory deficit is most apparent on
tasks that require spontaneous recall and may also be evident when the examiner
provides stimuli for the person to recall at a later time. Depending on the specific area
of the brain affected, deficits may be predominantly related to verbal or visual stimuli.
In some forms of an amnestic disorder, the individual may remember things from the
very remote past better than more recent events (e.g., a person may remember in vivid
detail a hospital stay that took place a decade before the examination, but may have no
idea that he or she is currently in the hospital).
The diagnosis is not made if the memory impairment occurs exclusively during the
course of a delirium (i.e., occurs only in the context of reduced ability to maintain and
shift attention). The ability to immediately repeat a sequential string of information (e.g.,
digit span) is typically not impaired in an amnestic disorder. When such impairment is
evident, it suggests the presence of an attentional disturbance that may be indicative of
a delirium. The diagnosis is also not made in the presence of other cognitive deficits
(e.g., aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, disturbance in executive functioning) that are charac-
teristic of a dementia. Individuals with an amnestic disorder may experience major
impairment in their social and vocational functioning as a result of their memory deficits,
which, at its extreme, may necessitate supervised living situations to ensure appropriate
feeding and care.Amnestic Disorders
157
Associated Features and Disorders
An amnestic disorder is often preceded by an evolving clinical picture that includes
confusion and disorientation, occasionally with attentional problems that suggest a
delirium (e.g., Amnestic Disorder Due to Thiamine Deficiency). Confabulation, often
evidenced by the recitation of imaginary events to fill gaps in memory, may be noted
during the early stages of an amnestic disorder but tends to disappear with time. It may
therefore be important to obtain corroborating information from family members or other
informants. Profound amnesia may result in disorientation to place and time, but rarely
to self. Disorientation to self may be encountered in individuals with a dementia but is
unusual in an amnestic disorder. Most individuals with a severe Amnestic Disorder lack
insight into their memory deficits and may explicitly deny the presence of severe memory
impairment despite evidence to the contrary. This lack of insight may lead to accusations
against others or, in rare instances, to agitation. Some individuals may acknowledge that
they have a problem but appear unconcerned. Apathy, lack of initiative, emotional
blandness, or other changes suggestive of altered personality function may be encoun-
tered. Individuals may be superficially friendly or agreeable, but they may have a shallow
or diminished range of affective expression. Individuals with transient global amnesia
often appear bewildered or befuddled. Subtle deficits in other cognitive functions may
be noted, but, by definition, they are not severe enough to cause clinically significant
impairment. Quantitative neuropsychological testing often demonstrates specific mem-
ory deficits in the absence of other cognitive disturbances. Performance on standardized
tests that assess recall of well-known historical events or public figures may be variable
among individuals with an Amnestic Disorder, depending on the nature and extent of
the deficit.
Specific Culture Features
Cultural and educational background should be taken into consideration in the
evaluation of memory. Individuals from certain backgrounds may not be familiar with
the information used in certain tests of memory (e.g., date of birth in cultures that do
not routinely celebrate birthdays).
Course
Age at onset and subsequent course of amnestic disorders may be quite variable,
depending on the primary pathological process causing the amnestic disorder. Traumatic
brain injury, stroke or other cerebrovascular events, or specific types of neurotoxic
exposure (e.g., carbon monoxide poisoning) may lead to an acute onset of an amnestic
disorder. Other conditions such as prolonged substance abuse, chronic neurotoxic
exposure, or sustained nutritional deficiency may lead to an insidious onset. Transient
amnesia due to a cerebrovascular etiology may be recurrent, with episodes lasting from
several hours to several days. Amnestic Disorders Due to Head Trauma may last for
variable amounts of time, with a characteristic pattern of greatest deficit immediately
after injury and improvement during the ensuing 2 years (further improvement beyond
24 months has been noted, but less commonly). Disorders due to destruction of
middle-temporal lobe structures (e.g., from infarction, surgical ablation, or malnutrition
occurring in the context of Alcohol Dependence) may cause persisting impairments.158
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
Differential
Diagnosis
Memory impairment is also a feature of delirium and dementia. In delirium, memory
dysfunction occurs in association with impaired consciousness, with reduced ability to
focus, sustain, or shift attention. In dementia, memory impairment must be accompanied
by multiple cognitive deficits (i.e., aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, or a disturbance in executive
functioning) that lead to clinically significant impairment.
An amnestic disorder must be distinguished from Dissociative Amnesia and
amnesia occurring in the context of other Dissociative Disorders (e.g., Dissociative
Identity Disorder). By definition, an amnestic disorder is due to the direct physiological
effects of a general medical condition or substance use. Furthermore, amnesia in
Dissociative Disorders typically does not involve deficits in learning and recalling new
information; rather, individuals present with a circumscribed inability to recall previous
memories, usually of a traumatic or stressful nature.
For memory disturbances (e.g., blackouts) that occur only during intoxication with
or withdrawal from a drug of abuse, the appropriate Substance Intoxication or
Substance Withdrawal should be diagnosed and a separate amnestic disorder diagnosis
is not made. For memory disturbances that are associated with the use of medication,
Adverse Effects of Medication Not Otherwise Specified (p. 680) may be noted, with the
medication indicated by the use of an E-code (see Appendix G).
The presumed etiology of the amnestic disorder determines the diagnosis (text and
criteria for each amnestic disorder diagnosis are provided separately later in this section).
If it is judged that the memory disturbance is a consequence of the direct physiological
effects of a general medical condition (including head trauma), then Amnestic Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition is diagnosed. If the memory disturbance results
from the persisting effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin
exposure), then Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder is diagnosed.
When both a substance (e.g., alcohol) and a general medical condition (e.g., head
trauma) have had an etiological role in the development of the memory disturbance,
both diagnoses are given. If it is not possible to establish a specific etiology (i.e.,
dissociative, substance induced, or due to a general medical condition), Amnestic
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is diagnosed.
Amnestic disorder must be distinguished from Malingering and from Factitious
Disorder. This difficult distinction can be assisted by systematic memory testing (which
often yields inconsistent results in Factitious Disorder or Malingering) and by the absence
of a general medical condition or substance use that is etiologically related to the memory
impairment.
Amnestic disorder should be distinguished from the less efficient memory charac-
teristic of Age-Related Cognitive Decline, which is within the expected age-adjusted
normative range for the individual.
294.0 Amnestic Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic and Associated Features
The descriptive features of Amnestic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
(Criteria A-C) are discussed on p. 156. In addition, the diagnosis requires that there mustAmnestic Disorders
159
be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
memory disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of a general medical
condition (including physical trauma) (Criterion D).
In determining whether the amnestic disturbance is due to a general medical
condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition.
Further, the clinician must establish that the amnestic disturbance is etiologically related
to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and
comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment.
Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship
between the amnestic disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological,
several considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the
presence of a temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the
general medical condition and that of the amnestic disturbance. A second consideration
is the presence of features that are atypical of memory impairment in the context of a
dissociative or other mental disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). Evidence
from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct association between the general
medical condition in question and the development of memory impairment can provide
a useful context in the assessment of a particular situation. In addition, the clinician must
also judge that the disturbance is not better accounted for by a Dissociative Disorder,
Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder, or another primary mental disorder
(e.g., Major Depressive Disorder). These determinations are explained in greater detail
in the "Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition" section (p. 165).
Individuals with Amnestic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition often show
other features of the primary systemic or cerebral disease that caused the memory
impairment. However, disordered mental status may be the sole presenting feature.
There are no specific or diagnostic features detectable with procedures such as magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT). However, damage to
mediotemporal lobe structures is common and may be reflected by enlargement of third
ventricle or temporal horns or by structural atrophy detected on MRI.
Specifiers
The following specifiers may be noted to indicate the duration of the disturbance.
Transient. This specifier is used to indicate durations usually from several hours
to a few days and for no more than 1 month. When the diagnosis is made within
the first month without waiting for recovery, the term "provisional" may be added.
"Transient global amnesia" is a specific form of transient amnestic disorder,
characterized by a dense, transitory inability to learn new information and a
variable impaired ability to recall events that occurred just before, or in the midst
of, the etiological cerebrovascular problem.
Chronic. This specifier is used for disturbances that last for more than 1 month.
Recording Procedures
In recording the diagnosis of Amnestic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition,
the clinician should note the identified general medical condition judged to be causing
the disturbance on Axis I (e.g., 294.0 Amnestic Disorder Due to Stroke). The ICD-9-CM
code for the general medical condition should also be noted on Axis III (e.g., 436 stroke).160
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
(See Appendix G for a list of selected ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for general medical
conditions.)
Associated General Medical Conditions
An amnestic disorder often occurs as the result of pathological processes (e.g., closed
head trauma, penetrating missile wounds, surgical intervention, hypoxia, infarction of
the distribution of the posterior cerebral artery, and herpes simplex encephalitis) that
cause damage to specific diencephalic and mediotemporal lobe structures (e.g.,
mammillary bodies, hippocampus, fornix). Pathology is most often bilateral, but deficits
may arise from unilateral lesions. Transient Amnestic Disorder, when encountered as
"transient global amnesia," is typically associated with cerebrovascular disease and
pathology in the vertebrobasilar system. Transient Amnestic Disorder may also arise from
episodic general medical conditions (e.g., metabolic conditions or seizures).
Differential
Diagnosis
See p. 158 for a discussion of the differential diagnosis of amnestic disorders.
I Diagnostic criteria for 294.0 Amnestic Disorder Due
to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. The development of memory impairment as manifested by impairment
in the ability to learn new information or the inability to recall previously
learned information.
B. The memory disturbance causes significant impairment in social or
occupational functioning and represents a significant decline from a
previous level of functioning.
C. The memory disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course
of a delirium or a dementia.
D. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
a general medical condition (including physical trauma).
Specify if:
Transient: if memory impairment lasts for 1 month or less
Chronic: if memory impairment lasts for more than 1 month
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
294.0 Amnestic Disorder Due to Head Trauma; also code the general medical
condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).Amnestic Disorders
161
Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
Diagnostic and Associated Features
The descriptive features of Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (Criteria A
and B) are discussed on p. 156. The memory disturbance does not occur exclusively
during the course of a delirium or a dementia and persists beyond the usual duration
of Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal (Criterion C). In addition, to diagnose Sub-
stance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder, there must be evidence from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory findings that the memory disturbance is etiologically
related to the persisting effects of substance use (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication,
toxin exposure) (Criterion D). This disorder is termed "persisting" because the memory
disturbance persists long after the individual is no longer experiencing the effects of
Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal.
Features that are associated with Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
are those associated with amnestic disorders generally (see p. 156). Even if currently
abstinent from substance use, most individuals with this disorder have previously had
a pattern of prolonged and heavy substance use that met criteria for Substance
Dependence. Because these disorders persist long after use of the substance has stopped,
blood or urine screens may be negative for the etiological substance. The age at onset
is rarely before age 20 years. The resulting impairment may remain stable or worsen,
even if substance use stops.
For a more detailed discussion of the features associated with Substance-Related
Disorders, see p. 175.
Recording Procedures
The name of the diagnosis begins with the specific substance (e.g., alcohol, secobarbital)
that is presumed to be causing the memory disturbance. The diagnostic code is selected
from the listing of classes of substances provided in the criteria set. For substances that
do not fit into any of the classes, the code for "Other Substance" should be used. In
addition, for medications prescribed at therapeutic doses, the specific medication can
be indicated by listing the appropriate E-code (see Appendix G). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of the memory
disturbance, each should be listed separately (e.g., 291.1 Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder; 292.83 Secobarbital-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder). If a
substance is judged to be the etiological factor but the specific substance or class of
substances is unknown, the diagnosis is 292.83 Unknown Substance-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder.
Specific Substances
Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder can occur in association with the
following classes of substances: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other
or unknown substances.
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder is apparently due to the vitamin
deficiency that is associated with prolonged, heavy ingestion of alcohol. Neurological
disturbances such as peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar ataxia, and myopathy are among
the associated features. Alcohol-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder due to thiamine162
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders
deficiency (Korsakoff's syndrome) often follows an acute episode of Wernicke's
encephalopathy, a neurological condition manifested by confusion, ataxia, eye-
movement abnormalities (gaze palsies, nystagmus), and other neurological signs.
Gradually, these manifestations subside, but a major impairment of memory remains. If
Wernicke's encephalopathy is treated early with large doses of thiamine, Alcohol-
Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder may not develop. Although age is not a specific
etiological factor in the condition, individuals who develop Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder generally have histories of many years of heavy alcohol use and are
most often over age 40 years. Although the mode of onset is typically abrupt, some
individuals may develop deficits insidiously over many years, due to repeated toxic and
nutritional insults, prior to the emergence of a final, more dramatically impairing episode
apparently related to thiamine deficiency. Once established, Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder usually persists indefinitely, although there may be slight improve-
ment over time and in a minority of the cases the condition can remit. Impairment is
usually quite severe, and lifelong custodial care may be necessary. Sedative-, Hypnotic-,
or Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder can follow prolonged and heavy use
of drugs from this class. The course is variable, and, unlike Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder, full recovery can occur. Medications reported to cause amnestic
disorders include anticonvulsants and intrathecal methotrexate. Toxins reported to evoke
symptoms of amnesia include lead, mercury, carbon monoxide, organophosphate
insecticides, and industrial solvents.
Differential Diagnosis
See p. 158 for a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of amnestic disorders.
I Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder
A. The development of memory impairment as manifested by impairment
in the ability to learn new information or the inability to recall previously
learned information.
B. The memory disturbance causes significant impairment in social or
occupational functioning and represents a significant decline from a
previous level of functioning.
C. The memory disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course
of a delirium or a dementia and persists beyond the usual duration of
Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal.
D. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the memory disturbance is etiologically related to the
persisting effects of substance use (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).
Code [Specific Substance|-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder:
(291.1 Alcohol; 292.83 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic; 292.83 Other [or
Unknown] Substance)Other Cognitive Disorders
163
294.8 Amnestic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category should be used to diagnose an amnestic disorder that does not meet criteria
for any of the specific types described in this section.
An example is a clinical presentation of amnesia for which there is insufficient
evidence to establish a specific etiology (i.e., dissociative, substance induced, or due to
a general medical condition).
Other Cognitive Disorders
294.9 Cognitive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders that are characterized by cognitive dysfunction presumed
to be due to the direct physiological effect of a general medical condition that do not
meet criteria for any of the specific deliriums, dementias, or amnestic disorders listed in
this section and that are not better classified as Delirium Not Otherwise Specified,
Dementia Not Otherwise Specified, or Amnestic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. For
cognitive dysfunction due to a specific or unknown substance, the specific Substance-
Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category should be used.
Examples include
1. Mild neurocognitive disorder: impairment in cognitive functioning as evidenced
by neuropsychological testing or quantified clinical assessment, accompanied
by objective evidence of a systemic general medical condition or central nervous
system dysfunction (see p. 706 for suggested research criteria)
2. Postconcussional disorder: following a head trauma, impairment in memory or
attention with associated symptoms (see p. 704 for suggested research criteria)This page intentionally left blankMental Disorders Due to a
General Medical Condition
A
Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is characterized by the
presence of mental symptoms that are judged to be the direct physiological
consequence of a general medical condition. The term general medical condition refers
to conditions that are coded on Axis III and that are listed outside the "Mental Disorders"
chapter of ICD. (See Appendix G for a condensed list of these conditions.) As discussed
in the "Introduction" to this manual, maintaining the distinction between mental
disorders and general medical conditions does not imply that there are fundamental
differences in their conceptualization, that mental disorders are unrelated to physical or
biological factors or processes, or that general medical conditions are unrelated to
behavioral or psychosocial factors or processes. The purpose of distinguishing general
medical conditions from mental disorders is to encourage thoroughness in evaluation
and to provide a shorthand term to enhance communication among health care
providers. However, in clinical practice, it is expected that more specific terminology
will be used to identify the specific condition involved.
In DSM-III-R, the Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition and the
Substance-Induced Disorders were called "organic" disorders and were listed together
in a single section. This differentiation of "organic" mental disorders as a separate class
implied that "nonorganic" or "functional" mental disorders were somehow unrelated to
physical or biological factors or processes. DSM-IV eliminates the term organic and
distinguishes those mental disorders that are due to a general medical condition from
those that are substance induced and those that have no specified etiology. The term
primary mental disorder is used as a shorthand to indicate those mental disorders that
are not due to a general medical condition and that are not substance induced.
Text and criteria for three of these disorders (i.e., Catatonic Disorder Due to a
General Medical Condition, Personality Change Due to a General Medical
Condition, and Mental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified Due to a General Medical
Condition) are included in this section. The text and criteria for the conditions listed
below are placed in other sections of the manual with disorders with which they share
phenomenology. The manual has been organized in this fashion to alert clinicians to
consider these disorders in making a differential diagnosis.
165166
Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition
293.0 Delirium Due to a General Medical Condition Text and criteria are in-
cluded in the "Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders" section,
p. 127.
.— Dementia Due to a General Medical Condition Text and criteria are in-
cluded in the "Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders" section,
p. 139-
294.0 Amnestic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition Text and criteria
are included in the "Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders"
section, p. 158.
293.8x Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition Text and cri-
teria are included in the "Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders" section, p. 306.
293.83 Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
are included in the "Mood Disorders" section, p. 366.
293.89 Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
are included in the "Anxiety Disorders" section, p. 436.
Text and criteria
Text and criteria
.— Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition Text and criteria
are included in the "Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders" section, p. 515.
780.5x Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
are included in the "Sleep Disorders" section, p. 597.
Text and criteria
Diagnostic Features
Three criteria appear in the criteria sets for each of the Mental Disorders Due to a General
Medical Condition:
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
a general medical condition.
Application of this criterion requires two separate judgments: that a general medical
condition is present (ascertained by history, physical examination, or laboratory assess-
ment) and that the disturbance (e.g., psychotic, mood, anxiety symptoms) is etiologically
related to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. Although
there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the
disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological, several considerations
provide guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a temporal association
between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general medical condition and that
of the mental disorder (e.g., symptoms of anxiety in an individual with a parathyroid
adenoma that resolve after surgical excision restores a normal serum calcium level).
Although evidence of a close temporal relationship is often useful in making a judgment
about etiology, there are many exceptions. For example, Psychotic Disorder Due to
Epilepsy can emerge many years after the onset of seizures. Alternatively, symptomsMental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition
167
and signs of a mental disorder can be among the first manifestations of a systemic or
cerebral disease, appearing months or more before the detection of the underlying
pathological process (e.g., depressed mood preceding choreiform movements in
Huntington's disease). Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition can also
persist after the general medical condition has resolved (e.g., depressed mood persisting
after thyroid hormone replacement). Moreover, a Mental Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition can be amenable to symptomatic treatment even while the general
medical condition remains active (e.g., depression in epilepsy). Treatment targeted to
the general medical condition that alleviates the symptoms of both the general medical
condition and the mental disturbance may provide stronger evidence of an etiological
relationship.
A second important consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of the
primary mental disorder. The most common example is an atypical age at onset or course
(e.g., first appearance of schizophrenic-like symptoms in a 75-year-old individual). There
may be unusual associated features (e.g., visual or tactile hallucinations accompanying
major depressive—like episodes) or diagnostic features that are disproportionately more
severe than would be expected given the overall presentation (e.g., a 50-pound weight
loss in an individual with otherwise mild depressive symptoms might suggest the
presence of a underlying general medical condition). The clinician should be alerted
especially by the presence of significant cognitive deficits that are out of proportion to
those typically encountered with the primary mental disorder.
Evidence from the literature of a well-established or frequently encountered
association between the general medical condition and the phenomenology of a specific
mental disorder may be useful in the evaluation of a particular situation. Such studies
may provide evidence of a plausible etiological association between the mental
symptoms and the general medical condition (e.g., lesion location or a known
pathophysiological mechanism likely to affect brain function) and of an elevated
prevalence rate of the mental symptoms (i.e., above the base rate in an appropriate
control population) in individuals with the general medical condition. Although such
evidence suggests a possible causal link between a mental disorder and a particular
general medical condition, it is not sufficient for making a determination in an individual
case because research studies generally reflect group means, whereas the clinician seeks
to make a decision regarding an individual. The text for each of the specific Mental
Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition contains a list of some of the general
medical conditions noted in the literature to be associated with that specific mental
disorder.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder.
In making the diagnosis of a Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition,
it is necessary to rule out primary mental disorders and mental disorders that are
substance induced. Ruling out primary mental disorders is often difficult because
individuals with primary mental disorders commonly have co-occurring general medical
conditions that are not causing the mental symptoms through direct physiological
mechanisms. There may be a number of other relationships between a mental disorder
and a general medical condition: the general medical condition may exacerbate the
symptoms or complicate treatment of the mental disorder; the two may be related
through nonphysiological mechanisms; or the co-occurrence may be coincidental. For
example, when depressive symptoms are precipitated by the general medical condition168
Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition
acting as a psychosocial stressor, rather than resulting from the direct physiological effects
of the general medical condition, the diagnosis would be Major Depressive Disorder or
Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood. In an individual with depressive symptoms
that co-occur with a general medical condition, a history of many Major Depressive
Episodes or a family history of depression would suggest a diagnosis of Major Depressive
Disorder, rather than a Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. Finally, the
clinician should also consider whether the mental symptoms are caused by a drug of
abuse, a medication, or toxin exposure (see p. 192 for guidelines). This is especially
important because many individuals with general medical conditions receive medica-
tions that may have the potential to cause a Substance-Induced Mental Disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
If symptoms (e.g., psychotic, mood, anxiety) occur only during periods of delirium,
they are considered to be associated features of the delirium and do not warrant a
separate diagnosis. These conditions (e.g., Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition) can be diagnosed separately only if they occur at times other than during
the delirium.
Recording Procedures
In recording a Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, the clinician should
note both the type of mental disturbance and the etiological general medical condition
on Axis I (e.g., 293-83 Mood Disorder Due to Hypothyroidism, With Depressive
Features). The ICD-9-CM code for the general medical condition (e.g., 244.9 hypo-
thyroidism) should also be noted on Axis III. In situations in which the clinician has
determined that the mental symptoms are not a direct physiological consequence of the
general medical condition, the primary mental disorder should be coded on Axis I and
the general medical condition should be coded on Axis III. (See Appendix G for a list
of selected ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for general medical conditions.)
Differential Diagnosis
A Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is distinguished from a primary
mental disorder by applying the criteria discussed earlier in this section under
"Diagnostic Features." When symptoms of a mental disorder and a general medical
condition co-occur, it is especially important to determine whether the etiological
relationship, if any, is directly physiological (in which case the diagnosis is Mental
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition) or through another mechanism (in which
case the diagnosis is a primary mental disorder). In some cases, the development of a
general medical condition or the presence of associated disability may precipitate or
exacerbate a mental disorder, with no known physiological link (e.g., the disability
associated with osteoarthritis may play a role in the development of depressive symptoms
or a Major Depressive Episode, but there is no known physiological mechanism
underlying the etiological relationship between the arthritis and the depressive symp-
toms). In this situation, the primary mental disorder (i.e., Adjustment Disorder or Major
Depressive Disorder) should be diagnosed on Axis I and the general medical condition
(i.e., osteoarthritis) should be listed on Axis III.293.89 Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
169
A Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition must also be distinguished
from a Substance-Induced Disorder. If there is evidence of recent or prolonged use
of a substance (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a
substance, or exposure to a toxin, a Substance-Induced Disorder should be considered.
It may be useful to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate laboratory
evaluation. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of)
significant substance intoxication or withdrawal or medication use may be especially
indicative of a Substance-Induced Disorder, depending on the type or the amount of
the substance used or the duration of use.
Delirium, dementia, psychotic, mood, anxiety, or sleep symptoms or a sexual
dysfunction may be caused by the combined effects of a general medical condition
and substance use (including medications). In such situations, both diagnoses (e.g.,
Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder) should be listed. If it is not possible to ascertain whether the mental symptoms
are due to a general medical condition or are substance induced, the Not Otherwise
Specified category may be used (see discussion below).
When, as often happens, the presentation of a Mental Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition contains a mix of different symptoms (e.g., mood and anxiety), it is
generally desirable to assign a single diagnosis based on which symptoms predominate
in the clinical presentation. In some situations, it is not possible to determine whether
the mental symptoms are primary, due to a general medical condition, or substance
induced. The Not Otherwise Specified category should be used in such situations.
293.89 Catatonic Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is the
presence of catatonia that is judged to be due to the direct physiological effects of a
general medical condition. Catatonia is manifested by any of the following: motoric
immobility, excessive motor activity, extreme negativism or mutism, peculiarities of
voluntary movement, echolalia, or echopraxia (Criterion A). There must be evidence
from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the catatonia is the
direct physiological consequence of a general medical condition (Criterion B). The
diagnosis is not given if the catatonia is better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., Manic Episode) (Criterion C) or if it occurs exclusively during the course of a
delirium (Criterion D).
Motoric immobility may be manifested by catalepsy (waxy flexibility) or stupor. The
excessive motor activity is apparently purposeless and is not influenced by external
stimuli. There may be extreme negativism that is manifested by resistance to all
instructions or the maintenance of a rigid posture against attempts to be moved.
Peculiarities of voluntary movement are manifested by the voluntary assumption of
inappropriate or bizarre postures or by prominent grimacing. Echolalia is the patholog-
ical, parrotlike, and apparently senseless repetition of a word or phrase just spoken by
another person. Echopraxia is the repetitive imitation of the movements of another
person.170
Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition
Recording Procedures
In recording Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, the clinician should
note both the specific phenomenology of the disturbance and the identified general
medical condition judged to be causing the disturbance on Axis I (e.g., 293.89 Catatonic
Disorder Due to Malignant Neoplasm of Brain). The ICD-9-CM code for the general
medical condition (e.g., 191.9 malignant neoplasm of brain) should also be noted on
Axis III. (See Appendix G for a list of selected ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for general
medical conditions.)
Associated General Medical Conditions
A variety of general medical conditions may cause catatonia, especially neurological
conditions (e.g., neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease, encephalitis) and
metabolic conditions (e.g., hypercalcemia, hepatic encephalopathy, homocystinuria,
diabetic ketoacidosis). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory findings,
and patterns of prevalence and onset reflect those of the etiological general medical
condition.
Differential
Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not
given if the catatonia occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. If the individual
is currently taking neuroleptic medication, Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
should be considered (e.g., abnormal positioning may be due to Neuroleptic-Induced
Acute Dystonia). Catatonic symptoms may also be present in Schizophrenia and Mood
Disorders. Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type, is distinguished by the absence of evidence
of a general medical condition that is etiologically related to the catatonia, and by the
presence of other symptoms characteristic of Schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, hallucina-
tions, disorganized speech, negative symptoms). A Mood Disorder With Catatonic
Features is likewise differentiated by the absence of evidence of a general medical
condition that is etiologically related to the catatonia, and by the presence of symptoms
that meet the criteria for a Major Depressive or Manic Episode.
Diagnostic criteria for 293.89 Catatonic Disorder Due
to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. The presence of catatonia as manifested by motoric immobility, exces-
sive motor activity (that is apparently purposeless and not influenced
by external stimuli), extreme negativism or mutism, peculiarities of
voluntary movement, or echolalia or echopraxia.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
a general medical condition.
(continued)310.1 Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition
171
D Diagnostic criteria for 293.89 Catatonic Disorder Due
to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition] (continued)
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., a Manic Episode).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
293-89 Catatonic Disorder Due to Hepatic Encephalopathy; also code the general
medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).
310.1 Personality Change
Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition is a
persistent personality disturbance that is judged to be due to the direct physiological
effects of a general medical condition. The personality disturbance represents a change
from the individual's previous characteristic personality pattern. In children, this
condition may be manifested as a marked deviation from normal development rather
than as a change in a stable personality pattern (Criterion A). There must be evidence
from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the personality change
is the direct physiological consequence of a general medical condition (Criterion B).
The diagnosis is not given if the disturbance is better accounted for by another mental
disorder (Criterion C). The diagnosis is not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively
during the course of a delirium or if symptoms meet the criteria for a dementia (Criterion
D). The disturbance must also cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E).
Common manifestations of the personality change include affective instability, poor
impulse control, outbursts of aggression or rage grossly out of proportion to any
precipitating psychosocial stressor, marked apathy, suspiciousness, or paranoid ideation.
The phenomenology of the change is indicated using the subtypes listed below. An
individual with the disorder is often characterized by others as "not himself [or herself]."
Although it shares the term "personality" with the Axis II Personality Disorders, this
diagnosis is coded on Axis I and is distinct by virtue of its specific etiology, different
phenomenology, and more variable onset and course.
The clinical presentation in a given individual may depend on the nature and
localization of the pathological process. For example, injury to the frontal lobes may
yield such symptoms as lack of judgment or foresight, facetiousness, disinhibition, and
euphoria. Right hemisphere strokes have often been shown to evoke personality changes
in association with unilateral spatial neglect, anosognosia (inability of the individual to
recognize a bodily or functional deficit such as the existence of hemiparesis), motor
impersistence, and other neurological deficits.172
Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition
Subtypes
The particular personality change can be specified by indicating the symptom presen-
tation that predominates in the clinical presentation:
Labile Type. This subtype is used if the predominant feature is affective lability.
Disinhibited Type. This subtype is used if the predominant feature is poor
impulse control (e.g., as evidenced by sexual indiscretions).
Aggressive Type. This subtype is used if the predominant feature is aggressive
behavior.
Apathetic Type. This subtype is used if the predominant feature is marked
apathy and indifference.
Paranoid Type. This subtype is used if the predominant feature is suspicious-
ness or paranoid ideation.
Other Type. This subtype would be used, for example, for a personality change
associated with a seizure disorder.
Combined Type. This subtype is used if more than one feature predominates
in the clinical picture.
Unspecified Type.
Recording Procedures
In recording Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition, the clinician should
note both the specific phenomenology of the disturbance, including appropriate
subtype, and the general medical condition judged to be causing the disturbance on
Axis I (e.g., 310.1 Personality Change Due to Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Paranoid
Type). The ICD-9-CM code for the general medical condition (e.g., 710.0 systemic lupus
erythematosus) should also be noted on Axis III. (See Appendix G for a list of selected
ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for general medical conditions.)
Associated General Medical Conditions
A variety of neurological and other general medical conditions may cause personality
changes, including central nervous system neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular
disease, Huntington's disease, epilepsy, infectious conditions with central nervous
system involvement (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus), endocrine conditions (e.g.,
hypothyroidism, hypo- and hyperadrenocorticism), and autoimmune conditions with
central nervous system involvement (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus). The associated
physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence and onset
reflect those of the neurological or other general medical condition involved.
Differential Diagnosis
Chronic general medical conditions associated with pain and disability can also be
associated with changes in personality. The diagnosis of Personality Change Due to a
General Medical Condition is given only if a direct pathophysiological mechanism can
be established. Personality change is a frequent associated feature of a dementia (e.g.,
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type). A separate diagnosis of Personality Change Due to
a General Medical Condition is not given if criteria are also met for a dementia or if the310.1 Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition
173
change occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. Furthermore, the diagnosis
of Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition is not given if the disturbance
is better accounted for by another Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition (e.g., Mood Disorder Due to Brain Tumor, With Depressive Features).
Personality changes may also occur in the context of Substance Dependence,
especially if the dependence is long-standing. The clinician should inquire carefully
about the nature and extent of substance use. If the clinician wishes to indicate an
etiological relationship between the personality change and substance use, the Not
Otherwise Specified category for the specific substance (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified) can be used.
Marked personality changes may also be an associated feature of other mental
disorders (e.g., Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder, Mood Disorders, Impulse-Control
Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified, Panic Disorder). However, in these disorders, no
specific physiological factor is judged to be etiologically related to the personality
change. Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition can be distinguished
from a Personality Disorder by the requirement for a clinically significant change from
baseline personality functioning and the presence of a specific etiological general
medical condition.
• Diagnostic criteria for 310.1 Personality Change Due
to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. A persistent personality disturbance that represents a change from the
individual's previous characteristic personality pattern. (In children, the
disturbance involves a marked deviation from normal development or
a significant change in the child's usual behavior patterns lasting at least
1 year).
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
a general medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(including other Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium and does not meet criteria for a dementia.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify type:
Labile Type: if the predominant feature is affective lability
DisinhibitedType: if the predominant feature is poor impulse control as
evidenced by sexual indiscretions, etc.
Aggressive Type: if the predominant feature is aggressive behavior
(continued)174
Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition
D Diagnostic criteria for 310.1 Personality Change Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical Condition] (continued)
Apathetic Type: if the predominant feature is marked apathy and
indifference
Paranoid Type: if the predominant feature is suspiciousness or paranoid
ideation
Other Type: if the predominant feature is not one of the above, e.g.,
personality change associated with a seizure disorder
Combined Type: if more than one feature predominates in the clinical
picture
Unspecified Type
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
310.1 Personality Change Due to Temporal Lobe Epilepsy; also code the general
medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).
293.9 Mental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
Due to a General Medical Condition
This residual category should be used for situations in which it has been established
that the disturbance is caused by the direct physiological effects of a general medical
condition, but the criteria are not met for a specific Mental Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition (e.g., dissociative symptoms due to complex partial seizures).
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g., 293-9
Mental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified Due to HIV Disease; also code the general
medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).Substance-Related
Disorders
T
he Substance-Related Disorders include disorders related to the taking of a drug of
abuse (including alcohol), to the side effects of a medication, and to toxin exposure.
In this manual, the term substance can refer to a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin.
The substances discussed in this section are grouped into 11 classes: alcohol; amphet-
amine or similarly acting sympathomimetics; caffeine; cannabis; cocaine; hallucinogens;
inhalants; nicotine; opioids; phencyclidine (PCP) or similarly acting arylcyclohexyl-
amines; and sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics. Although these 11 classes appear in
alphabetical order, the following classes share similar features: alcohol shares features
with the sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and cocaine shares features with
amphetamines or similarly acting sympathomimetics. Also included in this section are
Polysubstance Dependence and Other or Unknown Substance-Related Disorders (which
include most disorders related to medications or toxins).
Many prescribed and over-the-counter medications can also cause Substance-
Related Disorders. Symptoms are often related to the dosage of the medication and
usually disappear when the dosage is lowered or the medication is stopped. However,
there may sometimes be an idiosyncratic reaction to a single dose. Medications that may
cause Substance-Related Disorders include, but are not limited to, anesthetics and
analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive and
cardiovascular medications, antimicrobial medications, antiparkinsonian medications,
chemotherapeutic agents, corticosteroids, gastrointestinal medications, muscle relaxants
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, other over-the-counter medications, anti-
depressant medications, and disulfiram.
Exposure to a wide range of other chemical substances can also lead to the
development of a Substance-Related Disorder. Toxic substances that may cause Sub-
stance-Related Disorders include, but are not limited to, heavy metals (e.g., lead or
aluminum), rat poisons containing strychnine, pesticides containing acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors, nerve gases, ethylene glycol (antifreeze), carbon monoxide, and carbon
dioxide. The volatile substances (e.g., fuel, paint) are classified as "inhalants" (see p. 236)
if they are used for the purpose of becoming intoxicated; they are considered "toxins"
if exposure is accidental or part of intentional poisoning. Impairments in cognition or
mood are the most common symptoms associated with toxic substances, although
anxiety, hallucinations, delusions, or seizures can also result. Symptoms usually disap-
pear when the individual is no longer exposed to the substance, but resolution of
175176
Substance-Related Disorders
symptoms can take weeks or months and may require treatment.
The Substance-Related Disorders are divided into two groups: the Substance Use
Disorders (Substance Dependence and Substance Abuse) and the Substance-Induced
Disorders (Substance Intoxication, Substance Withdrawal, Substance-Induced Delirium,
Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia, Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disor-
der, Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, Substance-Induced Mood Disorder, Sub-
stance-Induced Anxiety Disorder, Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, and
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder). The section begins with the text and criteria sets for
Substance Dependence, Abuse, Intoxication, and Withdrawal that are applicable across
classes of substances. This is followed by general comments concerning associated
features; culture, age, and gender features; course; impairment and complications;
familial pattern; differential diagnosis; and recording procedures that apply to all
substance classes. The remainder of the section is organized by class of substance and
describes the specific aspects of Dependence, Abuse, Intoxication, and Withdrawal for
each of the 11 classes of substances. To facilitate differential diagnosis, the text and
criteria for the remaining Substance-Induced Disorders are included in the sections of
the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (e.g., Substance-
Induced Mood Disorder is included in the "Mood Disorders" section). The diagnoses
associated with each specific group of substances are shown in Table 1.
D
Substance Dependence
Features
The essential feature of Substance Dependence is a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and
physiological symptoms indicating that the individual continues use of the substance
despite significant substance-related problems. There is a pattern of repeated self-
administration that usually results in tolerance, withdrawal, and compulsive drug-taking
behavior. A diagnosis of Substance Dependence can be applied to every class of
substances except caffeine. The symptoms of Dependence are similar across the various
categories of substances, but for certain classes some symptoms are less salient, and in
a few instances not all symptoms apply (e.g., withdrawal symptoms are not specified
for Hallucinogen Dependence). Although not specifically listed as a criterion item,
"craving" (a strong subjective drive to use the substance) is likely to be experienced by
most (if not all) individuals with Substance Dependence. Dependence is defined as a
cluster of three or more of the symptoms listed below occurring at any time in the same
12-month period.
Tolerance (Criterion 1) is the need for greatly increased amounts of the substance
to achieve intoxication (or the desired effect) or a markedly diminished effect with
continued use of the same amount of the substance. The degree to which tolerance
develops varies greatly across substances. Individuals with heavy use of opioids and
stimulants can develop substantial (e.g., tenfold) levels of tolerance, often to a dosage
that would be lethal to a nonuser. Alcohol tolerance can also be pronounced, but is
usually much less extreme than for amphetamine. Many individuals who smokeTable 1. Diagnoses associated with class of substances
Abuse Intoxi-
cation With-
drawal Intoxi-
cation
Delirium With-
drawal
Delirium Dementia
X X X X I W P
X X X X I Depen-
dence
Alcohol Amphetamines
Caffeine
Sexual
Amnestic Psychotic Mood
Anxiety Dysfunc- Sleep
Disorder Disorders Disorders Disorders tions Disorders
P
I/W I/W I/W I I/W
I I/W I I I/W
I
X
I I I I I/W I/W
X I I* I I
X I I I I
I I I I I I I
P I/W I/W P I/W I/W Cannabis X X X Cocaine X X X Hallucinogens X X Inhalants X X Nicotine X Opioids X X X Phencyclidine X X X Sedatives, hypnotics,
or anxiolytics
Polysubstance X X X X I W P
X Other X X X X I W P
X
P
I
I
I I/W
I I/W
W I I/W
I/W I I/W
X
X
*Also Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (Flashbacks).
Note: X, I, W, I/W, or P indicates that the category is recognized in DSM-IV. In addition, /indicates that the specifier With Onset During Intoxication may be noted for
the category (except for Intoxication Delirium); Vindicates that the specifier With Onset During Withdrawal may be noted for the category (except for Withdrawal
Delirium); and //^indicates that either With Onset During Intoxication or With Onset During Withdrawal may be noted for the categoiy. Vindicates that the disorder is
Persisting.178
Substance-Related Disorders
cigarettes consume more than 20 cigarettes a day, an amount that would have produced
symptoms of toxicity when they first started smoking. Individuals with heavy use of
cannabis are generally not aware of having developed tolerance (although it has been
demonstrated in animal studies and in some individuals). It is uncertain whether any
tolerance develops to phencyclidine (PCP). Tolerance may be difficult to determine by
history alone when the substance used is illegal and perhaps mixed with various diluents
or with other substances. In such situations, laboratory tests may be helpful (e.g., high
blood levels of the substance coupled with little evidence of intoxication suggest that
tolerance is likely). Tolerance must also be distinguished from individual variability in
the initial sensitivity to the effects of particular substances. For example, some first-time
drinkers show very little evidence of intoxication with three or four drinks, whereas
others of similar weight and drinking histories have slurred speech and incoordi-
nation.
Withdrawal (Criterion 2a) is a maladaptive behavioral change, with physiological
and cognitive concomitants, that occurs when blood or tissue concentrations of a
substance decline in an individual who had maintained prolonged heavy use of the
substance. After developing unpleasant withdrawal symptoms, the person is likely to
take the substance to relieve or to avoid those symptoms (Criterion 2b), typically using
the substance throughout the day beginning soon after awakening. Withdrawal symp-
toms vary greatly across the classes of substances, and separate criteria sets for
Withdrawal are provided for most of the classes. Marked and generally easily measured
physiological signs of withdrawal are common with alcohol, opioids, and sedatives,
hypnotics, and anxiolytics. Withdrawal signs and symptoms are often present, but may
be less apparent, with stimulants such as amphetamines and cocaine, as well as with
nicotine. No significant withdrawal is seen even after repeated use of hallucinogens.
Withdrawal from phencyclidine and related substances has not yet been described in
humans (although it has been demonstrated in animals).
Neither tolerance nor withdrawal is necessary or sufficient for a diagnosis of
Substance Dependence. Some individuals (e.g., those with Cannabis Dependence) show
a pattern of compulsive use without any signs of tolerance or withdrawal. Conversely,
some postsurgical patients without Opioid Dependence may develop a tolerance to
prescribed opioids and experience withdrawal symptoms without showing any signs of
compulsive use. The specifiers With Physiological Dependence and Without Physiolog-
ical Dependence are provided to indicate the presence or absence of tolerance or
withdrawal.
The following items describe the pattern of compulsive substance use that is
characteristic of Dependence. The individual may take the substance in larger amounts
or over a longer period than was originally intended (e.g., continuing to drink until
severely intoxicated despite having set a limit of only one drink) (Criterion 3). The
individual may express a persistent desire to cut down or regulate substance use. Often,
there have been many unsuccessful efforts to decrease or discontinue use (Criterion 4).
The individual may spend a great deal of time obtaining the substance, using the
substance, or recovering from its effects (Criterion 5). In some instances of Substance
Dependence, virtually all of the person's daily activities revolve around the substance.
Important social, occupational, or recreational activities may be given up or reduced
because of substance use (Criterion 6). The individual may withdraw from family
activities and hobbies in order to use the substance in private or to spend more time
with substance-using friends. Despite recognizing the contributing role of the substance
to a psychological or physical problem (e.g., severe depressive symptoms or damage toSubstance Dependence
179
organ systems), the person continues to use the substance (Criterion 7). The key issue
in evaluating this criterion is not the existence of the problem, but rather the individual's
failure to abstain from using the substance despite having evidence of the difficulty it is
causing.
Specifiers
Tolerance and withdrawal may be associated with a higher risk for immediate general
medical problems and a higher relapse rate. Specifiers are provided to note their presence
or absence:
With Physiological Dependence. This specifier should be used when Sub-
stance Dependence is accompanied by evidence of tolerance (Criterion 1) or
withdrawal (Criterion 2).
Without Physiological Dependence. This specifier should be used when
there is no evidence of tolerance (Criterion 1) or withdrawal (Criterion 2). In
these individuals, Substance Dependence is characterized by a pattern of
compulsive use (at least three items from Criteria 3—7).
Course Specifiers
Six course specifiers are available for Substance Dependence. The four Remission
specifiers can be applied only after none of the criteria for Substance Dependence or
Substance Abuse have been present for at least 1 month. The definition of these four
types of Remission is based on the interval of time that has elapsed since the cessation
of Dependence (Early versus Sustained Remission) and whether there is continued
presence of one or more of the items included in the criteria sets for Dependence or
Abuse (Partial versus Full Remission). Because the first 12 months following Dependence
is a time of particularly high risk for relapse, this period is designated Early Remission.
After 12 months of Early Remission have passed without relapse to Dependence, the
person enters into Sustained Remission. For both Early Remission and Sustained
Remission, a further designation of Full is given if no criteria for Dependence or Abuse
have been met during the period of remission; a designation of Partial is given if at least
one of the criteria for Dependence or Abuse has been met, intermittently or continuously,
during the period of remission. The differentiation of Sustained Full Remission from
recovered (no current Substance Use Disorder) requires consideration of the length of
time since the last period of disturbance, the total duration of the disturbance, and the
need for continued evaluation. If, after a period of remission or recovery, the individual
again becomes dependent, the application of the Early Remission specifier requires that
there again be at least 1 month in which no criteria for Dependence or Abuse are met
Two additional specifiers have been provided: On Agonist Therapy and In a Controlled
Environment. For an individual to qualify for Early Remission after cessation of agonist
therapy or release from a controlled environment, there must be a 1-month period in
which none of the criteria for Dependence or Abuse are met.
The following Remission specifiers can be applied only after no criteria for
Dependence or Abuse have been met for at least 1 month. Note that these specifiers do
not apply if the individual is on agonist therapy or in a controlled environment (see
below).180
Substance-Related Disorders
Early Full Remission. This specifier is used if, for at least 1 month, but for less
than 12 months, no criteria for Dependence or Abuse have been met.
Dependence
«- 1 -
month
0-11 months
Early Partial Remission. This specifier is used if, for at least 1 month, but less
than 12 months, one or more criteria for Dependence or Abuse have been met
(but the full criteria for Dependence have not been met).
Dependence
«- 1 -
month
0-11 months
Sustained Full Remission. This specifier is used if none of the criteria for
Dependence or Abuse have been met at any time during a period of 12 months
or longer.
Dependence
«- 1 -
month
11+ months
Sustained Partial Remission. This specifier is used if full criteria for Depen-
dence have not been met for a period of 12 months or longer; however, one or
more criteria for Dependence or Abuse have been met.
Dependence
N- 1 -
month
11+ months
The following specifiers apply if the individual is on agonist therapy or in a controlled
environment:
On Agonist Therapy. This specifier is used if the individual is on a prescribed
agonist medication, and no criteria for Dependence or Abuse have been met for
that class of medication for at least the past month (except tolerance to, or
withdrawal from, the agonist). This category also applies to those being treated
for Dependence using a partial agonist or an agonist/antagonist.
In a Controlled Environment. This specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to alcohol and controlled substances is restricted, and
no criteria for Dependence or Abuse have been met for at least the past month.
Examples of these environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails,
therapeutic communities, or locked hospital units.Substance Dependence
181
• Criteria for Substance Dependence
A maladaptive pattern of substance use, leading to clinically significant
impairment or distress, as manifested by three (or more) of the following,
occurring at any time in the same 12-month period:
(1) tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
(a) a need for markedly increased amounts of the substance to
achieve intoxication or desired effect
(b) markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same
amount of the substance
(2) withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
(a) the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance
(refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria sets for Withdrawal
from the specific substances)
(b) the same (or a closely related) substance is taken to relieve
or avoid withdrawal symptoms
(3) the substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer
period than was intended
(4) there is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or
control substance use
(5) a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the
substance (e.g., visiting multiple doctors or driving long distances),
use the substance (e.g., chain-smoking), or recover from its effects
(6) important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given
up or reduced because of substance use
(7) the substance use is continued despite knowledge of having a
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is
likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance (e.g.,
current cocaine use despite recognition of cocaine-induced depres-
sion, or continued drinking despite recognition that an ulcer was
made worse by alcohol consumption)
Specify if:
With Physiological Dependence: evidence of tolerance or withdrawal
(i.e., either Item 1 or 2 is present)
Without Physiological Dependence: no evidence of tolerance or
withdrawal (i.e., neither Item 1 nor 2 is present)
Course specifiers (see text for definitions):
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
On Agonist Therapy
In a Controlled Environment182
Substance-Related Disorders
Substance Abuse
Features
The essential feature of Substance Abuse is a maladaptive pattern of substance use
manifested by recurrent and significant adverse consequences related to the repeated
use of substances. There may be repeated failure to fulfill major role obligations, repeated
use in situations in which it is physically hazardous, multiple legal problems, and
recurrent social and interpersonal problems (Criterion A). These problems must occur
recurrently during the same 12-month period. Unlike the criteria for Substance Depen-
dence, the criteria for Substance Abuse do not include tolerance, withdrawal, or a pattern
of compulsive use and instead include only the harmful consequences of repeated use.
A diagnosis of Substance Abuse is preempted by the diagnosis of Substance Dependence
if the individual's pattern of substance use has ever met the criteria for Dependence for
that class of substances (Criterion B). Although a diagnosis of Substance Abuse is more
likely in individuals who have only recently started taking the substance, some
individuals continue to have substance-related adverse social consequences over a long
period of time without developing evidence of Substance Dependence. The category of
Substance Abuse does not apply to caffeine and nicotine.
The individual may repeatedly demonstrate intoxication or other substance-related
symptoms when expected to fulfill major role obligations at work, school, or home
(Criterion Al). There may be repeated absences or poor work performance related to
recurrent hangovers. A student might have substance-related absences, suspensions, or
expulsions from school. While intoxicated, the individual may neglect children or
household duties. The person may repeatedly be intoxicated in situations that are
physically hazardous (e.g., while driving a car, operating machinery, or engaging in risky
recreational behavior such as swimming or rock climbing) (Criterion A2). There may be
recurrent substance-related legal problems (e.g., arrests for disorderly conduct, assault
and battery, driving under the influence) (Criterion A3). The person may continue to
use the substance despite a history of undesirable persistent or recurrent social or
interpersonal consequences (e.g., marital difficulties or divorce, verbal or physical fights)
(Criterion A4).
Criteria for Substance Abuse
A. A maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to clinically significant
impairment or distress, as manifested by one (or more) of the following,
occurring within a 12-month period:
(1) recurrent substance use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role
obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences or
poor work performance related to substance use; substance-related
absences, suspensions, or expulsions from school; neglect of
children or household)
(continued)Substance Intoxication
183
D Criteria for Substance Abuse (continued)
(2) recurrent substance use in situations in which it is physically
hazardous (e.g., driving an automobile or operating a machine
when impaired by substance use)
(3) recurrent substance-related legal problems (e.g., arrests for sub-
stance-related disorderly conduct)
(4) continued substance use despite having persistent or recurrent
social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the
effects of the substance (e.g., arguments with spouse about conse-
quences of intoxication, physical fights)
B. The symptoms have never met the criteria for Substance Dependence
for this class of substance.
Substance-Induced Disorders
Substance Intoxication
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Substance Intoxication is the development of a reversible
substance-specific syndrome due to the recent ingestion of (or exposure to) a substance
(Criterion A). The clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
associated with intoxication (e.g., belligerence, mood lability, cognitive impairment,
impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) are due to the direct
physiological effects of the substance on the central nervous system and develop during
or shortly after use of the substance (Criterion B). The symptoms are not due to a general
medical condition and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder (Criterion
C). Substance Intoxication is often associated with Substance Abuse or Dependence.
This category does not apply to nicotine. Evidence for recent intake of the substance
can be obtained from the history, physical examination (e.g., smell of alcohol on the
breath), or toxicological analysis of body fluids (e.g., urine or blood).
The most common changes involve disturbances of perception, wakefulness,
attention, thinking, judgment, psychomotor behavior, and interpersonal behavior. The
specific clinical picture in Substance Intoxication varies dramatically among individuals
and also depends on which substance is involved, the dose, the duration or chronicity
of dosing, the person's tolerance for the substance, the period of time since the last dose,
the expectations of the person as to the substance's effects, and the environment or
setting in which the substance is taken. Short-term or "acute" intoxications may have
different signs and symptoms from sustained or "chronic" intoxications. For example,
moderate cocaine doses may initially produce gregariousness, but social withdrawal may
develop if such doses are frequently repeated over days or weeks. Different substances
(sometimes even different substance classes) may produce identical symptoms. For184
Substance-Related Disorders
example, Amphetamine and Cocaine Intoxication can both present with grandiosity and
hyperactivity, accompanied by tachycardia, pupillary dilation, elevated blood pressure,
and perspiration or chills.
When used in the physiological sense, the term intoxication is broader than
Substance Intoxication as defined here. Many substances may produce physiological or
psychological changes that are not necessarily maladaptive. For example, an individual
with tachycardia from excessive caffeine use has a physiological intoxication, but if this
is the only symptom in the absence of maladaptive behavior, the diagnosis of Caffeine
Intoxication would not apply. The maladaptive nature of a substance-induced change
in behavior depends on the social and environmental context. The maladaptive behavior
generally places the individual at significant risk for adverse effects (e.g., accidents,
general medical complications, disruption in social and family relationships, vocational
or financial difficulties, legal problems). Signs and symptoms of intoxication may
sometimes persist for hours or days beyond the time when the substance is detectable
in body fluids. This may be due to continuing low concentrations of the substance in
certain areas of the brain or to a "hit and run" effect in which the substance alters a
physiological process, the recovery of which takes longer than the time for elimination
of the substance. These longer-term effects of intoxication must be distinguished from
withdrawal (i.e., symptoms initiated by a decline in blood or tissue concentrations of a
substance).
Criteria for Substance Intoxication
A. The development of a reversible substance-specific syndrome due to
recent ingestion of (or exposure to) a substance. Note: Different
substances may produce similar or identical syndromes.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
that are due to the effect of the substance on the central nervous system
(e.g., belligerence, mood lability, cognitive impairment, impaired judg-
ment, impaired social or occupational functioning) and develop during
or shortly after use of the substance.
C. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Substance Withdrawal
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Substance Withdrawal is the development of a substance-specific
maladaptive behavioral change, with physiological and cognitive concomitants, that is
due to the cessation of, or reduction in, heavy and prolonged substance use (Criterion A).
The substance-specific syndrome causes clinically significant distress or impairment inSubstance Withdrawal
185
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). The symptoms
are not due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by another
mental disorder (Criterion C). Withdrawal is usually, but not always, associated with
Substance Dependence (see p. 178). Most (perhaps all) individuals with Withdrawal
have a craving to readminister the substance to reduce the symptoms. The diagnosis of
Withdrawal is recognized for the following groups of substances: alcohol; amphetamines
and other related substances; cocaine; nicotine; opioids; and sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics. The signs and symptoms of Withdrawal vary according to the substance
used, with most symptoms being the opposite of those observed in Intoxication with
the same substance. The dose and duration of use and other factors such as the presence
or absence of additional illnesses also affect withdrawal symptoms. Withdrawal develops
when doses are reduced or stopped, whereas signs and symptoms of Intoxication
improve (gradually in some cases) after dosing stops.
Criteria for Substance Withdrawal
A. The development of a substance-specific syndrome due to the cessation
of (or reduction in) substance use that has been heavy and prolonged.
B. The substance-specific syndrome causes clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of func-
tioning.
C. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Associated Features of Substance Dependence, Abuse,
Intoxication, and Withdrawal
Assessment issues. The diagnosis of Substance Dependence requires obtaining a
detailed history from the individual and, whenever possible, from additional sources of
information (e.g., medical records; a spouse, relative, or close friend). In addition,
physical examination findings and laboratory test results can be helpful.
Route of administration. The route of administration of a substance is an important
factor in determining its effects (including the time course of developing Intoxication,
the probability that its use will produce physiological changes associated with With-
drawal, the likelihood that use will lead to Dependence or Abuse, and whether
consumption patterns will be characterized by periodic binges or daily use). Routes of
administration that produce more rapid and efficient absorption into the bloodstream
(e.g., intravenous, smoking, or "snorting") tend to result in a more intense intoxication
and an increased likelihood of an escalating pattern of substance use leading to
Dependence. Routes of administration that quickly deliver a large amount of the
substance to the brain are also associated with higher levels of substance consumption186
Substance-Related Disorders
and an increased likelihood of toxic effects. For example, a person who uses intravenous
amphetamine is more likely to consume large amounts of the substance and thereby
risk an overdose than the person who only takes amphetamine orally or intranasally.
Speed of onset within a class of substance. Rapidly acting substances are more
likely than slower-acting substances to produce immediate intoxication and lead to
Dependence or Abuse. For example, because diazepam and alprazolam both have a
more rapid onset than oxazepam, they may consequently be more likely to lead to
Substance Dependence or Abuse.
Duration of effects. The duration of effects associated with a particular substance is
also important in determining the time course of Intoxication and whether use of the
substance will lead to Dependence or Abuse. Relatively short-acting substances (e.g.,
certain anxiolytics) tend to have a higher potential for the development of Dependence
or Abuse than substances with similar effects that have a longer duration of action (e.g.,
phenobarbital). The half-life of the substance parallels aspects of Withdrawal: the longer
the duration of action, the longer the time between cessation and the onset of withdrawal
symptoms and the longer the Withdrawal is likely to last.
Use of multiple substances. Substance Dependence, Abuse, Intoxication, and With-
drawal often involve several substances used simultaneously or sequentially. For
example, individuals with Cocaine Dependence frequently also use alcohol, anxiolytics,
or opioids, often to counteract lingering cocaine-induced anxiety symptoms. Similarly,
individuals with Opioid Dependence or Cannabis Dependence usually have several
other Substance-Related Disorders, most often involving alcohol, anxiolytics, amphet-
amine, or cocaine. When criteria for more than one Substance-Related Disorder are met,
multiple diagnoses should be given. The situations in which a diagnosis of Polysubstance
Dependence should be given are described on p. 270.
Associated laboratory findings. Laboratory analyses of blood and urine samples
can help determine recent use of a substance. Blood levels offer additional information
on the amount of substance still present in the body. It should be noted that a positive
blood or urine test does not by itself indicate that the individual has a pattern of substance
use that meets criteria for a Substance-Related Disorder and that a negative blood or
urine test does not by itself rule out a diagnosis of a Substance-Related Disorder.
In the case of Intoxication, blood and urine tests can help to determine the relevant
substance(s) involved. Specific confirmation of the suspected substance may require
toxicological analysis, because various substances have similar Intoxication syndromes;
individuals often take a number of different substances; and because substitution and
contamination of street drugs are frequent, those who obtain substances illicitly often
do not know the specific contents of what they have taken. Toxicological tests may also
be helpful in differential diagnosis to determine the role of Substance Intoxication or
Withdrawal in the etiology (or exacerbation) of symptoms of a variety of mental disorders
(e.g., Mood Disorders, Psychotic Disorders). Furthermore, serial blood levels help to
differentiate Intoxication from Withdrawal.
The blood level of a substance may be a useful clue in determining whether the
person has a high tolerance to a given group of substances (e.g., a person presenting
with a blood alcohol level of over 150 mg/dl without signs of Alcohol Intoxication has
a significant tolerance to alcohol and is likely to be a chronic user of either alcohol orSubstance-Related Disorders
187
a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic). Another method for assessing tolerance is to
determine the individual's response to an agonist or antagonist medication. For example,
a person who does not exhibit any signs of intoxication from a dose of pentobarbital
of 200 mg or higher has a significant tolerance to sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics
and may need treatment to prevent the development of Withdrawal. Similarly, in cases
in which opioid tolerance or Dependence cannot be clearly confirmed by history, the
use of an antagonist (e.g., naloxone) to demonstrate whether withdrawal symptoms are
induced may be informative.
Laboratory tests can be useful in identifying Withdrawal in individuals with
Substance Dependence. Evidence for cessation or reduction of dosing may be obtained
by history or by toxicological analysis of body fluids (e.g., urine or blood). Although
most substances and their metabolites clear the urine within 48 hours of ingestion, certain
metabolites may be present for a longer period in those who use the substance
chronically. If the person presents with Withdrawal from an unknown substance, urine
tests may help identify the substance from which the person is withdrawing and make
it possible to initiate appropriate treatment. Urine tests may also be helpful in
differentiating Withdrawal from other mental disorders, because withdrawal symptoms
can mimic the symptoms of mental disorders unrelated to use of a substance.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
As presented in the sections specific to the 11 classes of substance, intoxication and
withdrawal states are likely to include physical signs and symptoms that are often the
first clue to a substance-related state. In general, intoxication with amphetamines or
cocaine is accompanied by increases in blood pressure, respiratory rate, pulse, and body
temperature. Intoxication with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances or with opioid
medication often involves the opposite pattern. Substance Dependence and Abuse are
often associated with general medical conditions often related to the toxic effects of the
substances on particular organ systems (e.g., cirrhosis in Alcohol Dependence) or the
routes of administration (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection from
shared needles).
Associated mental disorders. Substance use is often a component of the presenta-
tion of symptoms of mental disorders. When the symptoms are judged to be a direct
physiological consequence of a substance, a Substance-Induced Disorder is diagnosed
(see p. 192). Substance-Related Disorders are also commonly comorbid with, and
complicate the course and treatment of, many mental disorders (e.g., Conduct Disorder
in adolescents; Antisocial and Borderline Personality Disorders, Schizophrenia, Mood
Disorders).
Recording Procedures for Dependence, Abuse,
Intoxication, and Withdrawal
For drugs of abuse. The clinician should use the code that applies to the class of
substances, but record the name of the specific substance rather than the name of the
class. For example, the clinician should record 292.0 Secobarbital Withdrawal (rather
than Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal) or 305.70 Methamphetamine Abuse
(rather than Amphetamine Abuse). For substances that do not fit into any of the classes
(e.g., amyl nitrite), the appropriate code for "Other Substance Dependence," "Other188
Substance-Related Disorders
Substance Abuse," "Other Substance Intoxication," or "Other Substance Withdrawal"
should be used and the specific substance indicated (e.g., 305.90 Amyl Nitrite Abuse).
If the substance taken by the individual is unknown, the code for the class "Other (or
Unknown)" should be used (e.g., 292.89 Unknown Substance Intoxication). For a
particular substance, if criteria are met for more than one Substance-Related Disorder,
all should be diagnosed (e.g., 292.0 Heroin Withdrawal; 304.10 Heroin Dependence). If
there are symptoms or problems associated with a particular substance but criteria are
not met for any of the substance-specific disorders, the Not Otherwise Specified category
can be used (e.g., 292.9 Cannabis-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified). If multiple
substances are used, all relevant Substance-Related Disorders should be diagnosed
(e.g., 292.89 Mescaline Intoxication; 304.20 Cocaine Dependence). The situations in
which a diagnosis of 304.80 Polysubstance Dependence should be given are described
on p. 270.
For medications and toxins. For medications not covered above (as well as for
toxins), the code for "Other Substance" should be used. The specific medication can
coded by also listing the appropriate E-code on Axis I (see Appendix G) (e.g., 292.89
Benztropine Intoxication; E941.1 Benztropine). E-codes should also be used for classes
of substances listed above when they are taken as prescribed medications (e.g., opioids).
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
There are wide cultural variations in attitudes toward substance consumption, patterns
of substance use, accessibility of substances, physiological reactions to substances, and
prevalence of Substance-Related Disorders. Some groups forbid use of alcohol, whereas
in others the use of various substances for mood-altering effects is widely accepted. The
evaluation of any individual's pattern of substance use must take these factors into
account. Patterns of medication use and toxin exposure also vary widely within and
between countries.
Individuals between ages 18 and 24 years have relatively high prevalence rates for
the use of virtually every substance, including alcohol. For drugs of abuse, Intoxication
is usually the initial Substance-Related Disorder and usually begins in the teens.
Withdrawal can occur at any age as long as the relevant drug has been taken in
high-enough doses over a long-enough period of time. Dependence can also occur at
any age, but typically has its initial onset for most drugs of abuse in the 20s, 30s, an
40s. When a Substance-Related Disorder other than Intoxication begins in early
adolescence, it is often associated with Conduct Disorder and failure to complete school.
For drugs of abuse, Substance-Related Disorders are usually diagnosed more commonly
in males than in females, but the sex ratios vary with class of substance.
Course
The course of Dependence, Abuse, Intoxication, and Withdrawal varies with the class
of substance, route of administration, and other factors. The "Course" sections for the
various classes of substances indicate the specific features characteristic of each.
However, some generalizations across substances can be made.
Intoxication usually develops within minutes to hours after a sufficiently large single
dose and continues or intensifies with frequently repeated doses. Intoxication usuallySubstance-Related Disorders
189
begins to abate as blood or tissue concentrations of the substance decline, but signs and
symptoms may resolve slowly, in some situations lasting for hours or days after the
substance is no longer detectable in bodily fluids. The onset of Intoxication may be
delayed with slowly absorbed substances or with those that must be metabolized to
active compounds. Long-acting substances may produce prolonged intoxications.
Withdrawal develops with the decline of the substance in the central nervous system.
Early symptoms of Withdrawal usually develop a few hours after dosing stops for
substances with short elimination half-lives (e.g., alcohol, lorazepam, or heroin),
although withdrawal seizures may develop several weeks after termination of high doses
of long-half-life anxiolytic substances. The more intense signs of Withdrawal usually end
within a few days to a few weeks after the cessation of substance use, although some
subtle physiological signs may be detectable for many weeks or even months as part of
a protracted withdrawal syndrome.
A diagnosis of Substance Abuse is more likely in individuals who have begun using
substances only recently. For many individuals, Substance Abuse with a particular class
of substances evolves into Substance Dependence for the same class of substance. This
is particularly true for those substances that have a high potential for the development
of tolerance, withdrawal, and patterns of compulsive use. Some individuals have
episodes of Substance Abuse that occur over an extended period of time without ever
developing Substance Dependence. This is more true for those substances that have a
lower potential for the development of tolerance, withdrawal, and patterns of compulsive
use. Once criteria for Substance Dependence are met, a subsequent diagnosis of
Substance Abuse cannot be given for any substance in the same class. For a person with
Substance Dependence in full remission, any relapses that meet criteria for Substance
Abuse would be considered Dependence in partial remission (see course specifiers,
p. 179).
The course of Substance Dependence is variable. Although relatively brief and
self-limited episodes may occur (particularly during periods of psychosocial stress), the
course is usually chronic, lasting years, with periods of exacerbation and partial or full
remission. There may be periods of heavy intake and severe problems, periods of total
abstinence, and times of nonproblematic use of the substance, sometimes lasting for
months. Substance Dependence is sometimes associated with spontaneous, long-term
remissions. For example, follow-ups reveal that 20% (or more) of individuals with
Alcohol Dependence become permanently abstinent, usually following a severe life
stress (e.g., the threat or imposition of social or legal sanctions, discovery of a
life-threatening medical complication). During the first 12 months after the onset of
remission, the individual is particularly vulnerable to having a relapse. Many individuals
underestimate their vulnerability to developing a pattern of Dependence. When in a
period of remission, they incorrectly assure themselves that they will have no problem
regulating substance use and may experiment with gradually less restrictive rules
governing the use of the substance, only to experience a return to Dependence. The
presence of co-occurring mental disorders (e.g., Antisocial Personality Disorder, Major
Depressive Disorder) often increases the risk of complications and a poor outcome.
Impairment and Complications
Although many individuals with substance-related problems have good functioning (e.g.,
in personal relationships, job performance, earning abilities), these disorders often cause
marked impairment and severe complications. Individuals with Substance-Related190
Substance-Related Disorders
Disorders frequently experience a deterioration in their general health. Malnutrition and
other general medical conditions may result from improper diet and inadequate personal
hygiene. Intoxication or Withdrawal may be complicated by trauma related to impaired
motor coordination or faulty judgment. The materials used to "cut" certain substances
can produce toxic or allergic reactions. Using substances intranasally ("snorting") may
cause erosion of the nasal septum. Stimulant use can result in sudden death from cardiac
arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, a cerebrovascular accident, or respiratory arrest. The
use of contaminated needles during intravenous administration of substances can cause
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, hepatitis, tetanus, vasculitis, septicemia,
subacute bacterial endocarditis, embolic phenomena, and malaria.
Substance use can be associated with violent or aggressive behavior, which may be
manifested by fights or criminal activity, and can result in injury to the person using the
substance or to others. Automobile, home, and industrial accidents are a major
complication of Substance Intoxication and result in an appreciable rate of morbidity
and mortality. Approximately one-half of all highway fatalities involve either a driver or
a pedestrian who is intoxicated. In addition, perhaps 10% of individuals with Substance
Dependence commit suicide, often in the context of a Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder. Finally, because most, if not all, of the substances described in this section
cross the placenta, they may have potential adverse effects on the developing fetus (e.g.,
fetal alcohol syndrome). When taken repeatedly in high doses by the mother, a number
of substances (e.g., cocaine, opioids, alcohol, and sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics)
are capable of causing physiological dependence in the fetus and a withdrawal syndrome
in the newborn.
Familial Pattern
Information about familial associations has been best studied for the Alcohol-Related
Disorders (see the detailed discussion on p. 203). There is some evidence for genetically
determined differences among individuals in the doses required to produce Alcohol
Intoxication. Although Substance Abuse and Dependence appear to aggregate in
families, some of this effect may be explained by the concurrent familial distribution of
Antisocial Personality Disorder, which may predispose individuals to the development
of Substance Abuse or Dependence.
Differential
Diagnosis
Substance-Related Disorders are distinguished from nonpathological substance use
(e.g., "social" drinking) and from the use of medications for appropriate medical
purposes by the presence of tolerance, withdrawal, compulsive use, or substance-
related problems (e.g., medical complications, disruption in social and family relation-
ships, vocational or financial difficulties, legal problems). Repeated episodes of
Substance Intoxication are almost invariably prominent features of Substance Abuse
or Dependence. However, one or more episodes of Intoxication alone are not sufficient
for a diagnosis of either Substance Dependence or Abuse.
It may sometimes be difficult to distinguish between Substance Intoxication and
Substance Withdrawal. If a symptom arises during the time of dosing and then
gradually abates after dosing stops, it is likely to be part of Intoxication. If the symptom
arises after stopping the substance, or reducing its use, it is likely to be part of Withdrawal.Substance-Related Disorders
191
Individuals with Substance-Related Disorders often take more than one substance and
may be intoxicated with one substance (e.g., heroin) while withdrawing from another
(e.g., diazepam). This differential is further complicated by the fact that the signs and
symptoms of Withdrawal from some substances (e.g., sedatives) may partially mimic
Intoxication with others (e.g., amphetamines). Substance Intoxication is differentiated
from Substance Intoxication Delirium (p. 129), Substance-Induced Psychotic
Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication (p. 310), Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication (p. 370), Substance-Induced Anxiety
Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication (p. 439), Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction, With Onset During Intoxication (p. 519), and Substance-Induced
Sleep Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication (p. 601), by the fact that the
symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated with
Substance Intoxication and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
Substance Withdrawal is distinguished from Substance Withdrawal Delirium (p. 129),
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Onset During Withdrawal (p. 310),
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder, With Onset During Withdrawal (p. 370),
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Onset During Withdrawal (p. 439),
and Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder, With Onset During Withdrawal (p. 601),
by the fact that the symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with Substance Withdrawal and are severe enough to warrant independent
clinical attention.
The additional Substance-Induced Disorders described above present with symp-
toms that resemble non-substance-induced (i.e., primary) mental disorders. See
p. 193 for a discussion of this important but often difficult differential diagnosis. An
additional diagnosis of a Substance-Induced Disorder is usually not made when
symptoms of preexisting mental disorders are exacerbated by Substance Intox-
ication or Substance Withdrawal (although a diagnosis of Substance Intoxication or
Withdrawal might be appropriate). For example, Intoxication with some substances may
exacerbate the mood swings in Bipolar Disorder, the auditory hallucinations and
paranoid delusions in Schizophrenia, the intrusive thoughts and terrifying dreams in
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and the anxiety symptoms in Panic Disorder, Generalized
Anxiety Disorder, Social Phobia, and Agoraphobia. Intoxication or Withdrawal may also
increase the risk of suicide, violence, and impulsive behavior in individuals with a
preexisting Antisocial or Borderline Personality Disorder.
Many neurological (e.g., head injuries) or metabolic conditions produce symptoms
that resemble, and are sometimes misattributed to, Intoxication or Withdrawal (e.g.,
fluctuating levels of consciousness, slurred speech, incoordination). The symptoms of
infectious diseases may also resemble Withdrawal from some substances (e.g., viral
gastroenteritis can be similar to Opioid Withdrawal). If the symptoms are judged to be
a direct physiological consequence of a general medical condition, the appropriate
Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition should be diagnosed. If the
symptoms are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of both substance use
and a general medical condition, both a Substance-Related Disorder and a Mental
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition may be diagnosed. If the clinician is unable
to determine whether the presenting symptoms are substance induced, due to a general
medical condition, or primary, the appropriate Not Otherwise Specified Category
should be diagnosed (e.g., psychotic symptoms with indeterminate etiology would be
diagnosed as Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).192
Substance-Related Disorders
Substance-Induced Mental Disorders
Included Elsewhere in the Manual
Substance-Induced Disorders cause a variety of symptoms that are characteristic of other
mental disorders (see Table 1, p. 177). To facilitate differential diagnosis, the text and
criteria for these other Substance-Induced Disorders are included in the sections of the
manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology:
Substance-Induced Delirium (see p. 129) is included in the "Delirium, Dementia,
and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders" section.
Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia (see p. 152) is included in the "Delirium,
Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders" section.
Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (see p. l6l) is included in the
"Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders" section.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder (see p. 310) is included in the "Schizo-
phrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders" section. (In DSM-III-R these disorders were
classified as "organic hallucinosis" and "organic delusional disorder.")
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370) is included in the "Mood
Disorders" section.
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439) is included in the "Anxiety
Disorders" section.
Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (see p. 519) is included in the "Sexual
and Gender Identity Disorders" section.
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601) is included in the "Sleep
Disorders" section.
In addition, Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (Flashbacks)
(p. 233) is included under "Hallucinogen-Related Disorders" in this section.
In DSM-III-R, the Substance-Induced Disorders and the Mental Disorders Due to a
General Medical Condition were called "organic" disorders and were listed together in
a single section. This differentiation of "organic" mental disorders as a separate class
implied that "nonorganic" or "functional" mental disorders were somehow unrelated to
physical or biological factors or processes. DSM-IV eliminates the term organic and
distinguishes those mental disorders that are substance induced from those that are due
to a general medical condition and those that have no specified etiology. The term
primary mental disorder is used as a shorthand to indicate those mental disorders that
are not substance induced and that are not due to a general medical condition.
The context in which a Substance-Induced Disorder develops can have important
management implications. Substance-Induced Disorders can develop in the context of
Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal, or they can persist long after the
substance has been eliminated from the body (Substance-Induced Persisting Disorders).
Substance-induced presentations that develop in the context of Substance Intoxication
can be indicated by using the specifier With Onset During Intoxication. Substance-
induced presentations that develop in the context of Substance Withdrawal can be
indicated by the specifier With Onset During Withdrawal. It should be noted that a
diagnosis of a Substance-Induced Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication or With-
drawal, should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxication or Substance
Withdrawal only when the symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the
intoxication or withdrawal syndrome that is characteristic of the particular substance and
when they are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. ThreeSubstance-Related Disorders
193
Substance-Induced Persisting Disorders are included: Substance-Induced Persisting
Dementia (see p. 152) and Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (see p. 161)
in the "Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders" section and
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder under "Hallucinogen-Related Disorders" i
this section (see p. 233). The essential feature of a Substance-Induced Persisting Disorde
is prolonged or permanent persistence of substance-related symptoms that continue long
after the usual course of Intoxication or Withdrawal has ended.
For drugs of abuse, a diagnosis of a Substance-Induced Mental Disorder requires
that there be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of
Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal. In evaluating whether the symptoms
of a mental disorder are the direct physiological effect of substance use, it is important
to note the temporal relationship between the onset and offset of substance use and the
onset and offset of the symptoms. If the symptoms precede the onset of substance use
or persist during extended periods of abstinence from the substance, it is likely that the
symptoms are not substance induced. As a rule of thumb, symptoms that persist for
more than 4 weeks after the cessation of acute Intoxication or Withdrawal should be
considered to be manifestations of an independent non-substance-induced mental
disorder or of a Substance-Induced Persisting Disorder. Clinical judgment is necessary
in making this distinction, particularly because different substances have different
characteristic durations of intoxication and withdrawal and varying relationships with
symptoms of mental disorders. Because the withdrawal state for some substances can
be relatively protracted, it is useful to carefully observe the course of symptoms for an
extended period of time (e.g., 4 weeks or more) after the cessation of acute Intoxication
or Withdrawal, making all possible efforts to maintain the individual's abstinence. This
can be accomplished in various ways, including inpatient hospitalization or residential
treatment, requiring frequent follow-up visits, recruiting friends and family members to
help keep the person substance free, regularly evaluating urine or blood for the presence
of substances, and, if alcohol is involved, routinely evaluating changes in state markers
of heavy drinking such as gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT).
Another consideration in differentiating a primary mental disorder from a Substance-
Induced Disorder is the presence of features that are atypical of the primary disorder
(e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the onset of a Manic Episode after
age 45 years may suggest a substance-induced etiology. In contrast, factors that suggest
that the symptoms are better accounted for by a primary mental disorder include a history
of prior episodes of the disturbance that were not substance induced. Finally, the
presence or absence of the substance-specific physiological and behavioral features of
Intoxication or Withdrawal should be considered. For example, the presence of paranoid
delusions would not be surprising in the context of Phencyclidine Intoxication, but
would be unusual with Sedative Intoxication, increasing the likelihood that a primary
Psychotic Disorder accounts for the symptoms. Furthermore, the dosage of the substance
used should be taken into account. For example, the presence of paranoid delusions
would be unusual after a single puff of marijuana, but might be compatible with high
doses of hashish.
Substance-Induced Disorders can also occur as a side effect of a medication or from
exposure to a toxin. Substance-Induced Disorders due to a prescribed treatment for a
mental disorder or general medical condition must have their onset while the person is
receiving the medication (or during withdrawal if the medication is associated with a
withdrawal syndrome). Once the treatment is discontinued, the symptoms will usually
remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance, the194
Substance-Related Disorders
presence of a withdrawal syndrome, and individual variability). If symptoms persist, a
primary mental disorder (not related to a medication) should be considered. Because
individuals with general medical conditions often take medications for those conditions,
the clinician must consider the possibility that the symptoms are caused by the
physiological consequences of the general medical condition rather than the medication,
in which case Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is diagnosed. The
history may provide a basis for making this judgment, but a change in the treatment for
the general medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may be
needed to determine empirically for that person whether or not the medication is the
causative agent.
Recording Procedures for Substance-Induced
Mental Disorders Included Elsewhere in the Manual
The name of the diagnosis begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, diazepam,
dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the symptoms. The diagnostic code is
selected from the listing of classes of substances provided in the criteria sets for the
particular Substance-Induced Disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the
classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for "Other Substance" should be used. In
addition, for medications prescribed at therapeutic doses, the specific medication can
be indicated by listing the appropriate E-code on Axis I (see Appendix G). The name
of the disorder (e.g., Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder; Diazepam-Induced Anxiety
Disorder) is followed by the specification of the predominant symptom presentation and
the context in which the symptoms developed (e.g., 292.11 Cocaine-Induced Psychotic
Disorder, With Delusions, With Onset During Intoxication; 292.89 Diazepam-Induced
Anxiety Disorder, With Onset During Withdrawal). When more than one substance is
judged to play a significant role in the development of symptoms, each should be listed
separately. If a substance is judged to be the etiological factor, but the specific substance
or class of substances is unknown, the class "Unknown Substance" should be used.
Alcohol-Related Disorders
In most cultures, alcohol is the most frequently used brain depressant and a cause of
considerable morbidity and mortality. At some time in their lives, as many as 90% of
adults in the United States have had some experience with alcohol, and a substantial
number (60% of males and 30% of females) have had one or more alcohol-related adverse
life events (e.g., driving after consuming too much alcohol, missing school or work due
to a hangover). Fortunately, most individuals learn from these experiences to moderate
their drinking and do not develop Alcohol Dependence or Abuse.
This section contains discussions specific to the Alcohol-Related Disorders. Texts
and criteria sets have already been provided earlier for the generic aspects of Substance
Dependence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all substances.
Texts specific to Alcohol Dependence and Abuse are provided below; however, there
are no additional specific criteria sets for Alcohol Dependence or Alcohol Abuse. Specific
texts and criteria sets for Alcohol Intoxication and Alcohol Withdrawal are also provided
below. The Alcohol-Induced Disorders (other than Alcohol Intoxication and Withdrawal)Alcohol-Related Disorders
195
are described in the sections of the manual with disorders with which they share
phenomenology (e.g., Alcohol-Induced Mood Disorder is included in the "Mood
Disorders" section). Listed below are the Alcohol Use Disorders and the Alcohol-Induced
Disorders.
Alcohol Use Disorders
303.90
305.00
Alcohol Dependence (see p. 195)
Alcohol Abuse (see p. 196)
Alcohol-Induced Disorders
303.00
291.8
291.0
291.0
291.2
291.1
291-5
291.3
291.8
291.8
291.8
291.8
291-9
Alcohol Intoxication (see p. 196)
Alcohol Withdrawal (see p. 197) Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
Alcohol Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium (see p. 129)
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Dementia (see p. 152)
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (see p. 161)
Alcohol-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Alcohol-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations (see p. 310)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Alcohol-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Alcohol-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (see p. 519)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication
Alcohol-Induced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Alcohol-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 204)
Alcohol Use Disorders
303.90 Alcohol Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Physiologica
dependence on alcohol is indicated by evidence of tolerance or symptoms of With-
drawal. Alcohol Withdrawal (see p. 197) is characterized by the development of
withdrawal symptoms 12 hours or so after the reduction of intake following prolonged,
heavy, alcohol ingestion. Because Withdrawal from alcohol can be unpleasant and
intense, individuals with Alcohol Dependence may continue to consume alcohol, despite
adverse consequences, often to avoid or to relieve the symptoms of withdrawal. A
substantial minority of individuals who have Alcohol Dependence never experience
clinically relevant levels of Alcohol Withdrawal, and only about 5% of individuals with
Alcohol Dependence ever experience severe complications of withdrawal (e.g., delirium,196
Substance-Related Disorders
grand mal seizures). Once a pattern of compulsive use develops, individuals with
Dependence may devote substantial periods of time to obtaining and consuming
alcoholic beverages. These individuals often continue to use alcohol despite evidence
of adverse psychological or physical consequences (e.g., depression, blackouts, liver
disease, or other sequelae).
Specifiers
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence (see
p. 179 for more details):
With Physiological Dependence
Without Physiological Dependence
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
On Agonist Therapy
In a Controlled Environment
305.00 Alcohol Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). School and job
performance may suffer either from the aftereffects of drinking or from actual intoxication
on the job or at school; child care or household responsibilities may be neglected; and
alcohol-related absences may occur from school or job. The person may use alcohol in
physically hazardous circumstances (e.g., driving an automobile or operating machinery
while drunk). Legal difficulties may arise because of alcohol use (e.g., arrests for
intoxicated behavior or for driving under the influence). Finally, individuals with Alcohol
Abuse may continue to consume alcohol despite the knowledge that continued
consumption poses significant social or interpersonal problems for them (e.g., violent
arguments with spouse while intoxicated, child abuse). When these problems are
accompanied by evidence of tolerance, withdrawal, or compulsive behavior related to
alcohol use, a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence, rather than Alcohol Abuse, should be
considered.
Alcohol-Induced Disorders
303.00 Alcohol Intoxication
Refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential feature
of Alcohol Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive behavioral
or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood
lability, impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that develop
during, or shortly after, the ingestion of alcohol (Criteria A and B). These changes are
accompanied by evidence of slurred speech, incoordination, unsteady gait, nystagmus,
impairment in attention or memory, or stupor or coma (Criterion C). The symptoms must
not be due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by anotherAlcohol-Related Disorders
197
mental disorder (Criterion D). The resulting picture is similar to what is observed during
Benzodiazepine or Barbiturate Intoxication. The levels of incoordination can interfere
with driving abilities and with performing usual activities to the point of causing
accidents. Evidence of alcohol use can be obtained by smelling alcohol on the
individual's breath, eliciting a history from the individual or another observer, and, when
needed, having the individual undertake breath, blood, or urine toxicology analyses.
Diagnostic criteria for 303.00 Alcohol Intoxication
A. Recent ingestion of alcohol.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, im-
paired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that
developed during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion.
C. One (or more) of the following signs, developing during, or shortly after,
alcohol use:
(1) slurred speech
(2) incoordination
(3) unsteady gait
(4) nystagmus
(5) impairment in attention or memory
(6) stupor or coma
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
291.8 Alcohol Withdrawal
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Withdrawal (see p. 184). The essential
feature of Alcohol Withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal syndrome
that develops after the cessation of (or reduction in) heavy and prolonged alcohol use
(Criteria A and B). The withdrawal syndrome includes two or more of the following
symptoms: autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate greater than 100);
increased hand tremor; insomnia; nausea or vomiting; transient visual, tactile, or auditory
hallucinations or illusions; psychomotor agitation; anxiety; and grand mal seizures. When
hallucinations or illusions are observed, the clinician can specify With Perceptual
Disturbances (see below). The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The
symptoms must not be due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted
for by another mental disorder (e.g., Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal or
Generalized Anxiety Disorder) (Criterion D).198
Substance-Related Disorders
Symptoms are usually relieved by administering alcohol or any other brain depres-
sant. The withdrawal symptoms typically begin when blood concentrations of alcohol
decline sharply (i.e., within 4—12 hours) after alcohol use has been stopped or reduced.
However, withdrawal symptoms can develop after longer periods of time (i.e., for up
to a few days). Because of the short half-life of alcohol, symptoms of Alcohol Withdrawa
usually peak in intensity during the second day of abstinence and are likely to improve
markedly by the fourth or fifth day. Following acute Withdrawal, however, symptoms
of anxiety, insomnia, and autonomic dysfunction may persist for up to 3-6 months at
lower levels of intensity.
Fewer than 5% of individuals who develop Alcohol Withdrawal develop dramatic
symptoms (e.g., severe autonomic hyperactivity, tremors, and Alcohol Withdrawal
Delirium). Grand mal seizures occur in fewer than 3% of individuals. Alcohol Withdrawa
Delirium (p. 129) includes disturbances in consciousness and cognition and visual,
tactile, or auditory hallucinations ("delirium tremens," or "DTs"). When Alcohol With-
drawal Delirium develops, it is likely that a clinically relevant general medical condition
may be present (e.g., liver failure, pneumonia, gastrointestinal bleeding, sequelae of head
trauma, hypoglycemia, an electrolyte imbalance, or postoperative status).
Specifier
The following specifier may be applied to a diagnosis of Alcohol Withdrawal:
With Perceptual Disturbances. This specifier may be noted when hallucina-
tions with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the
absence of a delirium. Intact reality testing means that the person knows that the
hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent external reality.
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, should be considered.
Diagnostic criteria for 291.8 Alcohol Withdrawal
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) alcohol use that has been heavy and
prolonged.
B. Two (or more) of the following, developing within several hours to a
few days after Criterion A:
(1) autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate
greater than 100)
(2) increased hand tremor
(3) insomnia
(4) nausea or vomiting
(5) transient visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions
(6) psychomotor agitation
(7) anxiety
(8) grand mal seizures
(continued)Alcohol-Related Disorders
199
D Diagnostic criteria for 291.8 Alcohol Withdrawal (continued)
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Specify if:
With Perceptual Disturbances
Other Alcohol-Induced Disorders
The following Alcohol-Induced Disorders are described in the sections of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Alcohol Intoxication Delirium
(p. 129), Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium (p. 129), Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Dementia (p. 152), Alcohol-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (p. 161),
Alcohol-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310), Alcohol-Induced Mood Disorder
(p. 370), Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder (p. 439), Alcohol-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction (p. 519), and Alcohol-Induced Sleep Disorder (p. 601). These disorde
are diagnosed instead of Alcohol Intoxication or Alcohol Withdrawal only when the
symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the Alcohol Intoxication or
Withdrawal syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on Alcohol-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Alcohol Dependence and
Abuse are often associated with Dependence on, or Abuse of, other substances (e.g.,
cannabis; cocaine; heroin; amphetamines; the sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and
nicotine). Alcohol may be used to alleviate the unwanted effects of these other
substances or to substitute for them when they are not available. Symptoms of
depression, anxiety, and insomnia frequently accompany Alcohol Dependence and
sometimes precede it. Alcohol Intoxication is sometimes associated with an amnesia for
the events that occurred during the course of the intoxication ("blackouts"). This
phenomenon may be related to the presence of a high blood alcohol level and, perhaps,
to the rapidity with which this level is reached.
Alcohol-Related Disorders are associated with a significant increase in the risk of
accidents, violence, and suicide. It is estimated that approximately one-half of all
highway fatalities involve either a driver or a pedestrian who has been drinking. Severe
Alcohol Intoxication, especially in individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder, is200
Substance-Related Disorders
associated with the commission of criminal acts. For example, more than one-half of all
murderers and their victims are believed to have been intoxicated with alcohol at the
time of the murder. Severe Alcohol Intoxication also contributes to disinhibition and
feelings of sadness and irritability, which contribute to suicide attempts and completed
suicides. Alcohol-Related Disorders contribute to absenteeism from work, job-related
accidents, and low employee productivity. Alcohol Abuse and Dependence, along with
Abuse and Dependence of other substances, are prevalent among homeless individuals
in the United States. Mood Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, and Schizophrenia may also
be associated with Alcohol Dependence. Although antisocial behavior and Antisocial
Personality Disorder are associated with Alcohol-Related Disorders, they are even more
common with disorders related to illegal substances (e.g., cocaine, heroin, or amphet-
amine) whose cost commonly leads to criminal activity.
Associated laboratory findings. One sensitive laboratory indicator of heavy drink-
ing is an elevation (> 30 units) of gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT). This finding may
be the only laboratory abnormality. At least 70% of individuals with a high GGT level
are persistent heavy drinkers. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) may be elevated to
high-normal values in individuals who drink heavily due to deficiencies of some B
vitamins, as well as to the direct toxic effects of alcohol on erythropoiesis. Although the
MCV can be used to help identify those who drink heavily, it is a poor method of
monitoring abstinence because of the long half-life of red blood cells. Liver function
tests (e.g., serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase [SGOT] and alkaline phosphatase)
can reveal liver injury that is a consequence of heavy drinking. Elevations of lipid levels
in the blood (e.g., triglycerides and lipoprotein cholesterol) can be observed, resulting
from decreases in gluconeogenesis associated with heavy drinking. High fat content in
the blood also contributes to the development of fatty liver. High-normal levels of uric
acid can occur with heavy drinking, but are relatively nonspecific. The most direct test
available to measure alcohol consumption cross-sectionally is blood alcohol concentra-
tion, which can also be used to judge tolerance to alcohol. An individual with a
concentration of 100 mg of ethanol per deciliter of blood who does not show signs of
intoxication can be presumed to have acquired at least some degree of tolerance to
alcohol. At 200 mg/dl, most nontolerant individuals demonstrate severe intoxication.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Repeated intake of high doses of alcohol can affect nearly every organ system, especially
the gastrointestinal tract, cardiovascular system, and the central and peripheral nervous
systems. Gastrointestinal effects include gastritis, stomach or duodenal ulcers, and, in
about 15% of those who use alcohol heavily, liver cirrhosis and pancreatitis. There is
also an increased rate of cancer of the esophagus, stomach, and other parts of the
gastrointestinal tract. One of the most common associated general medical conditions is
low-grade hypertension. Cardiomyopathy and other myopathies are less common, but
occur at an increased rate among those who drink very heavily. These factors, along
with marked increases in levels of triglycerides and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol,
contribute to an elevated risk of heart disease. Peripheral neuropathy may be evidenced
by muscular weakness, paresthesias, and decreased peripheral sensation. More persistent
central nervous system effects include cognitive deficits, severe memory impairment,
and degenerative changes in the cerebellum. These effects are related to vitamin
deficiencies (particularly of the B vitamins, including thiamine). The most devastating
central nervous system effect is the relatively rare Alcohol-Induced Persisting AmnesticAlcohol-Related Disorders
201
Disorder (p. l6l) (Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome), in which the ability to encode new
memory is severely impaired.
Many of the symptoms and physical findings associated with the Alcohol-Related
Disorders are a consequence of the disease states noted above. Examples are the
dyspepsia, nausea, and bloating that accompany gastritis and the hepatomegaly,
esophageal varices, and hemorrhoids that accompany alcohol-induced changes in the
liver. Other physical signs include tremor, unsteady gait, insomnia, and erectile
dysfunction. Individuals with chronic Alcohol Dependence may exhibit decreased
testicular size and feminizing effects associated with reduced testosterone levels.
Repeated heavy drinking during pregnancy is associated with spontaneous abortion and
fetal alcohol syndrome. Individuals with preexisting histories of epilepsy or severe head
trauma are more likely to develop alcohol-related seizures. Alcohol Withdrawal may be
associated with nausea, vomiting, gastritis, hematemesis, dry mouth, puffy blotchy
complexion, and mild peripheral edema. Alcohol Intoxication may result in falls and
accidents that may cause fractures, subdural hematomas, and other forms of brain
trauma. Severe, repeated Alcohol Intoxication may also suppress immune mechanisms
and predispose individuals to infections and increase the risk for cancers. Finally,
unanticipated Alcohol Withdrawal in hospitalized patients for whom a diagnosis of
Alcohol Dependence has been overlooked can add to the risks and costs of hospital-
ization and to time spent in the hospital.
Specific Culture, Age, and
Gender Features
The cultural traditions surrounding the use of alcohol in family, religious, and social
settings, especially during childhood, can affect both alcohol use patterns and the
likelihood that alcohol problems will develop. Marked differences characterize the
quantity, frequency, and patterning of alcohol consumption in the countries of the world.
In most Asian cultures, the overall prevalence of Alcohol-Related Disorders may be
relatively low, and the male-to-female ratio high. These findings appear to relate to the
absence, in perhaps 50% of Japanese, Chinese, and Korean individuals, of the form of
aldehyde dehydrogenase that eliminates low levels of the first breakdown product of
alcohol, acetaldehyde. When such individuals consume alcohol, they experience a
flushed face and palpitations and are less likely to consume large amounts. In the United
States, whites and African-Americans have nearly identical rates of Alcohol Abuse and
Dependence. Latino males have somewhat higher rates, although prevalence is lower
among Latino females than among females from other ethnic groups. Low educational
level, unemployment, and lower socioeconomic status are associated with Alcohol-
Related Disorders, although it is often difficult to separate cause from effect. Years of
schooling may not be as important in determining risk as completing the immediate
educational goal (i.e., those who drop out of high school or college have particularly
high rates of Alcohol-Related Disorders).
Among adolescents, Conduct Disorder and repeated antisocial behavior often
co-occur with Alcohol Abuse or Dependence and with other Substance-Related Disor-
ders. Age-related physical changes in elderly persons result in increased brain suscep-
tibility to the depressant effects of alcohol, decreased rates of liver metabolism of a
variety of substances, including alcohol, and decreased percentages of body water. These
changes can cause older people to develop more severe intoxication and subsequent202
Substance-Related Disorders
problems at lower levels of consumption. Alcohol-related problems in older people are
also especially likely to be associated with other medical complications.
Alcohol Abuse and Dependence are more common in males than in females, with
a male-to-female ratio as high as 5:1. However, this ratio varies substantially depending
on the age group. Females tend to start drinking heavily later in life than do males and
may develop Alcohol-Related Disorders later. Once Alcohol Abuse or Dependence
develops in females, it may progress more rapidly, so that by middle age females may
have the same range of health problems and social, interpersonal, and occupational
consequences as do males. Females tend to develop higher blood alcohol concentrations
than males at a given dose of alcohol per kilogram because of their lower percentage
of body water, higher percentage of body fat, and the fact that they tend to metabolize
alcohol more slowly (in part because of lower levels of alcohol dehydrogenase in the
mucosal lining of the stomach). Because of these higher alcohol levels, they may be at
greater risk than males for some of the health-related consequences of heavy alcohol
intake (in particular, liver damage).
Prevalence
Alcohol Dependence and Abuse are among the most prevalent mental disorders in the
general population. A community study conducted in the United States from 1980 to
1985 using DSM-III criteria found that about 8% of the adult population had Alcohol
Dependence and about 5% had Alcohol Abuse at some time in their lives. Approximately
6% had Alcohol Dependence or Abuse during the preceding year. From data collected
prospectively, about 7.5% had symptoms that met criteria for an Alcohol-Related Disorder
during a 1-year period. A United States national probability sample of noninstitutional-
ized adults (ages 15-54 years) conducted in 1990-1991 using DSM-III-R criteria reported
that around 14% had Alcohol Dependence at some time in their lives, with approximately
7% having had Dependence in the past year.
Course
The first episode of Alcohol Intoxication is likely to occur in the mid-teens, with the age
at onset of Alcohol Dependence peaking in the 20s to mid-30s. The large majority of
those who develop Alcohol-Related Disorders do so by their late 30s. The first evidence
of Withdrawal is not likely to appear until after many other aspects of Dependence have
developed. Alcohol Abuse and Dependence have a variable course that is frequently
characterized by periods of remission and relapse. A decision to stop drinking, often in
response to a crisis, is likely to be followed by weeks or more of abstinence, which is
often followed by limited periods of controlled or nonproblematic drinking. However,
once alcohol intake resumes, it is highly likely that consumption will rapidly escalate
and that severe problems will once again develop. Clinicians often have the erroneous
impression that Alcohol Dependence and Abuse are intractable disorders based on the
fact that those who present for treatment typically have a history of many years of severe
alcohol-related problems. However, these most severe cases represent only a small
proportion of individuals with Alcohol Dependence or Abuse, and the typical person
with an Alcohol Use Disorder has a much more promising prognosis. Follow-up studies
of more highly functioning individuals show a higher than 65% 1-year abstinence rateAlcohol-Related Disorders
203
following treatment. Some individuals (perhaps 20% or more) with Alcohol Dependence
achieve long-term sobriety even without active treatment.
During even mild Alcohol Intoxication, different symptoms are likely to be observed
at different time points. Early in the drinking period, when blood alcohol levels are
rising, symptoms often include talkativeness, a sensation of well-being, and a bright,
expansive mood. Later, especially when blood alcohol levels are falling, the individual
is likely to become progressively more depressed, withdrawn, and cognitively impaired.
At very high blood alcohol levels (e.g., 200-300 mg/dl), a nontolerant individual is likely
to fall asleep and enter a first stage of anesthesia. Higher blood alcohol levels (e.g., in
excess of 300—400 mg/dl) can cause inhibition of respiration and pulse and even death
in nontolerant individuals. The duration of Intoxication depends on how much alcohol
was consumed over what period of time. In general, the body is able to metabolize
approximately one drink per hour, so that the blood alcohol level generally decreases
at a rate of 15-20 mg/dl per hour. Signs and symptoms of intoxication are likely to be
more intense when the blood alcohol level is rising than when it is falling.
Familial Pattern
Alcohol Dependence often has a familial pattern, and at least some of the transmission
can be traced to genetic factors. The risk for Alcohol Dependence is three to four times
higher in close relatives of people with Alcohol Dependence. Higher risk is associated
with a greater number of affected relatives, closer genetic relationships, and the severity
of the alcohol-related problems in the affected relative. Most studies have found a
significantly higher risk for Alcohol Dependence in the monozygotic twin than in the
dizygotic twin of a person with Alcohol Dependence. Adoption studies have revealed
a three- to fourfold increase in risk for Alcohol Dependence in the children of individuals
with Alcohol Dependence when these children were adopted away at birth and raised
by adoptive parents who did not have this disorder. However, genetic factors explain
only a part of the risk for Alcohol Dependence, with a significant part of the risk coming
from environmental or interpersonal factors that may include cultural attitudes toward
drinking and drunkenness, the availability of alcohol (including price), expectations of
the effects of alcohol on mood and behavior, acquired personal experiences with
alcohol, and stress.
Differential
Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Alcohol-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g., depressed
mood) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder
versus Alcohol-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features, With Onset During
Intoxication). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis.
The incoordination and impaired judgment that are associated with Alcohol
Intoxication can resemble the symptoms of certain general medical conditions (e.g.,
diabetic acidosis, cerebellar ataxias, and other neurological conditions such as multiple
sclerosis). Similarly, the symptoms of Alcohol Withdrawal can also be mimicked by
certain general medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis).
Essential tremor, a disorder that frequently runs in families, may suggest the tremu-
lousness associated with Alcohol Withdrawal.204
Substance-Related Disorders
Alcohol Intoxication (except for the smell of alcohol on the breath) closely resembles
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication. The presence of alcohol on the
breath does not by itself exclude intoxications with other substances because multiple
substances are not uncommonly used concurrently. Although intoxication at some time
during their lives is likely to be a part of the history of most individuals who drink
alcohol, when this phenomenon occurs regularly or causes impairment it is important
to consider the possibility of a diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence or Alcohol Abuse.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal produces a syndrome very similar to
that of Alcohol Withdrawal.
Alcohol Intoxication and Alcohol Withdrawal are distinguished from the other
Alcohol-Induced Disorders (e.g., Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Onset
During Withdrawal) because the symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of
those usually associated with Alcohol Intoxication or Alcohol Withdrawal and are severe
enough to warrant independent clinical attention. Alcohol idiosyncratic intoxication,
defined as marked behavioral change, usually aggressiveness, following the ingestion
of a relatively small of amount of alcohol, was included in DSM-III-R. Because of limited
support in the literature for the validity of this condition, it is no longer included as a
separate diagnosis in DSM-IV. Such presentations would most likely be diagnosed as
Alcohol Intoxication or Alcohol-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
291.9 Alcohol-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
The Alcohol-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders associ-
ated with the use of alcohol that are not classifiable as Alcohol Dependence, Alcohol
Abuse, Alcohol Intoxication, Alcohol Withdrawal, Alcohol Intoxication Delirium, Alcohol
Withdrawal Delirium, Alcohol-Induced Persisting Dementia, Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder, Alcohol-Induced Psychotic Disorder, Alcohol-Induced Mood Disor-
der, Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder, Alcohol-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, or Alco-
hol-Induced Sleep Disorder.
Amphetamine
(or Amphetamine-Like)-Related Disorders
The class of amphetamine and amphetamine-like substances includes all substances with
a substituted-phenylethylamine structure, such as amphetamine, dextroamphetamine,
and methamphetamine ("speed"). Also included are those substances that are structurally
different but also have amphetamine-like action, such as methylphenidate and other
agents used as appetite suppressants ("diet pills"). These substances are usually taken
orally or intravenously, although methamphetamine is also taken by the nasal route
("snorting"). A very pure form of methamphetamine is called "ice" because of the
appearance of its crystals when observed under magnification. Due to its high purity
and relatively low vaporization point, ice can be smoked to produce an immediate and
powerful stimulant effect (as is done with "crack" cocaine). In addition to the synthetic
amphetamine-like compounds, there are naturally occurring, plant-derived stimulantsAmphetamine-Related Disorders
205
such as khat that can produce Abuse or Dependence. Unlike cocaine, which is almost
always purchased on the illegal market, amphetamines and other stimulants may be
obtained by prescription for the treatment of obesity, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder, and Narcolepsy. Prescribed stimulants have sometimes been diverted into the
illegal market, often in the context of weight-control programs. Most of the effects of
amphetamines and amphetamine-like drugs are similar to those of cocaine. However,
unlike cocaine, these substances do not have local anesthetic (i.e., membrane ion
channel) activity, therefore, their risk for inducing certain general medical conditions
(e.g., cardiac arrhythmias and seizures) may be lower. The psychoactive effects of most
amphetamine-like substances last longer than those of cocaine, and the peripheral
sympathomimetic effects may be more potent.
This section contains discussions that are specific to the Amphetamine-Related
Disorders. Texts and criteria sets have already been provided for the generic aspects of
Substance Dependence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all
substances. Texts specific to Amphetamine Dependence and Abuse are provided below;
however, there are no additional specific criteria sets for Amphetamine Dependence or
Amphetamine Abuse. Specific texts and criteria sets for Amphetamine Intoxication and
Amphetamine Withdrawal are also provided below. The Amphetamine-Induced Disor-
ders (other than Amphetamine Intoxication and Withdrawal) are described in the
sections of the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (e.g.,
Amphetamine-Induced Mood Disorder is included in the "Mood Disorders" section).
Listed below are the Amphetamine Use Disorders and the Amphetamine-Induced
Disorders.
Amphetamine Use Disorders
304.40
305-70
Amphetamine Dependence (see p. 206)
Amphetamine Abuse (see p. 206)
Amphetamine-Induced Disorders
292.89
292.0
292.81
292.11
292.12
292.84
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.9
Amphetamine Intoxication (see p. 207)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
Amphetamine Withdrawal (see p. 208)
Amphetamine Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Amphetamine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Amphetamine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
(see p. 310) Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Amphetamine-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Amphetamine-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Amphetamine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (see p. 519)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Amphetamine-Induced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Amphetamine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 211)206
Substance-Related Disorders
Amphetamine Use Disorders
304.40 Amphetamine Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). The patterns
of use and course of Amphetamine Dependence are similar to those of Cocaine
Dependence because both substances are potent central nervous system stimulants with
similar psychoactive and sympathomimetic effects. However, amphetamines are longer
acting than cocaine and thus are usually self-administered less frequently. As with
Cocaine Dependence, usage may be chronic or episodic, with binges ("speed runs")
punctuated by brief drug-free periods. Aggressive or violent behavior is associated with
Amphetamine Dependence, especially when high doses are smoked (e.g., "ice") or
administered intravenously. As with cocaine, intense but temporary anxiety, as well as
paranoid ideation and psychotic episodes that resemble Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type,
are often seen, especially in association with high-dose use. Tolerance to amphetamines
develops and often leads to substantial escalation of the dose. Conversely, some
individuals with Amphetamine Dependence develop reverse tolerance (sensitization).
In these cases, small doses may produce marked stimulant and other adverse mental
and neurological effects.
Specifiers
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Amphetamine Dependence
(see p. 179 for more details):
With Physiological Dependence
Without Physiological Dependence
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
On Agonist Therapy
In a Controlled Environment
305.70 Amphetamine Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). Legal difficulties
typically arise as a result of behavior while intoxicated with amphetamines (especially
aggressive behavior), as a consequence of obtaining the drug on the illegal market, or
as a result of drug possession or use. Occasionally, individuals with Amphetamine Abuse
will engage in illegal acts (e.g., manufacturing amphetamines, theft) to obtain the drug;
however, this behavior is more common among those with Dependence. Individuals
may continue to use the substance despite the knowledge that continued use results in
arguments with family members while the individual is intoxicated or presents a negative
example to children or other close family members. When these problems are accom-
panied by evidence of tolerance, withdrawal, or compulsive behavior, a diagnosis of
Amphetamine Dependence rather than Abuse should be considered.Amphetamine-Related Disorders
207
Amphetamine-Induced Disorders
292.89 Amphetamine Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Amphetamine Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive
behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or shortly after, use of
amphetamine or a related substance (Criteria A and B). Amphetamine Intoxication
generally begins with a "high" feeling, followed by the development of symptoms such
as euphoria with enhanced vigor, gregariousness, hyperactivity, restlessness, hypervigi-
lance, interpersonal sensitivity, talkativeness, anxiety, tension, alertness, grandiosity,
stereotypical and repetitive behavior, anger, fighting, and impaired judgment. In the case
of chronic intoxication, there may be affective blunting with fatigue or sadness and social
withdrawal. These behavioral and psychological changes are accompanied by two or
more of the following signs and symptoms: tachycardia or bradycardia; pupillary dilation;
elevated or lowered blood pressure; perspiration or chills; nausea or vomiting; evidence
of weight loss; psychomotor agitation or retardation; muscular weakness, respiratory
depression, chest pain, or cardiac arrhythmias; and confusion, seizures, dyskinesias,
dystonias, or coma (Criterion C). Amphetamine Intoxication, either acute or chronic, is
often associated with impaired social or occupational functioning. The symptoms must
not be due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by another
mental disorder (Criterion D). The magnitude and manifestations of the behavioral and
physiological changes depend on the dose used and individual characteristics of the
person using the substance (e.g., tolerance, rate of absorption, chronicity of use). The
changes associated with intoxication begin no longer than 1 hour after substance use
and sometimes within seconds, depending on the specific drug and method of delivery.
Specifier
The following specifier may be applied to a diagnosis of Amphetamine Intoxication:
With Perceptual Disturbances. This specifier may be noted when hallucina-
tions with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the
absence of a delirium. Intact reality testing means that the person knows that the
hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent external reality.
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, should be considered.
Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Amphetamine
Intoxication
A. Recent use of amphetamine or a related substance (e.g., methyl-
phenidate).
(continued)208
Substance-Related Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Amphetamine Intoxication
(continued)
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., euphoria or affective blunting; changes in sociability; hypervigi-
lance; interpersonal sensitivity; anxiety, tension, or anger; stereotyped
behaviors; impaired judgment; or impaired social or occupational
functioning) that developed during, or shortly after, use of amphetamine
or a related substance.
C. Two (or more) of the following, developing during, or shortly after, use
of amphetamine or a related substance:
(1) tachycardia or bradycardia
(2) pupillary dilation
(3) elevated or lowered blood pressure
(4) perspiration or chills
(5) nausea or vomiting
(6) evidence of weight loss
(7) psychomotor agitation or retardation
(8) muscular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or cardiac
arrhythmias
(9) confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Specify if:
With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0 Amphetamine Withdrawal
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Withdrawal (see p. 184). The essential
feature of Amphetamine Withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops within a few hours to several days after cessation of (or reduction
in) heavy and prolonged amphetamine use (Criteria A and B). The withdrawal syndrome
is characterized by the development of dysphoric mood and two or more of the following
physiological changes: fatigue, vivid and unpleasant dreams, insomnia or hypersomnia,
increased appetite, and psychomotor retardation or agitation. Anhedonia and drug
craving can also be present but are not part of the diagnostic criteria. The symptoms
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be due to a general
medical condition and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Marked withdrawal symptoms ("crashing") often follow an episode of intense,
high-dose use (a "speed run"). These periods are characterized by intense and unpleasant
feelings of lassitude and depression, generally requiring several days of rest and
recuperation. Weight loss commonly occurs during heavy stimulant use, whereas aAmphetamine-Related Disorders
209
marked increase in appetite with rapid weight gain is often observed during withdrawal.
Depressive symptoms may last several days and may be accompanied by suicidal
ideation.
Diagnostic criteria for 292.0 Amphetamine Withdrawal
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) amphetamine (or a related substance) use
that has been heavy and prolonged.
B. Dysphoric mood and two (or more) of the following physiological
changes, developing within a few hours to several days after Criterion A:
(1) fatigue
(2) vivid, unpleasant dreams
(3) insomnia or hypersomnia
(4) increased appetite
(5) psychomotor retardation or agitation
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Other Amphetamine-Induced Disorders
The following Amphetamine-Induced Disorders are described in the sections of the
manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Amphetamine Intox-
ication Delirium (p. 129), Amphetamine-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310),
Amphetamine-Induced Mood Disorder (p. 370), Amphetamine-Induced Anxiet
Disorder (p. 439), Amphetamine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (p. 519), and Am-
phetamine-Induced Sleep Disorder (p. 601). These disorders are diagnosed instea
of Amphetamine Intoxication or Amphetamine Withdrawal only when the symptoms
are in excess of those usually associated with Amphetamine Intoxication or Withdrawal
and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on
Amphetamine-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Acute Amphetamine Intoxication is sometimes associated with confusion, rambling
speech, headache, transient ideas of reference, and tinnitus. During intense Amphet-
amine Intoxication, paranoid ideation, auditory hallucinations in a clear sensorium, and210
Substance-Related Disorders
tactile hallucinations may be experienced. Frequently, the person using the substance
recognizes these symptoms as resulting from the stimulants. Extreme anger with threats
or acting out of aggressive behavior may occur. Mood changes such as depression with
suicidal ideation, irritability, anhedonia, emotional lability, or disturbances in attention
and concentration are common, especially during withdrawal. Weight loss, anemia, and
other signs of malnutrition and impaired personal hygiene are often seen with sustained
Amphetamine Dependence.
Amphetamine-Related Disorders and other stimulant-related disorders are often
associated with Dependence on or Abuse of other substances, especially those with
sedative properties (such as alcohol or benzodiazepines), which are usually taken to
reduce the unpleasant, "jittery" feelings that result from stimulant drug effects. The
intravenous use of amphetamines is sometimes associated with Opioid Dependence.
The laboratory and physical examination findings and the mental disorders and
general medical conditions that are associated with the Amphetamine-Related Disorders
are generally similar to those that are associated with the Cocaine-Related Disorders (see
p. 226). Urine tests for substances in this class usually remain positive for only 1-3 days,
even after a "binge." Adverse pulmonary effects are seen less often than with cocaine
because substances in this class are inhaled much less frequently. Fewer maternal and
neonatal complications have been attributed to this class of substances than to cocaine.
This difference may reflect the greater prevalence of cocaine use rather than lower
toxicity from amphetamines. Seizures, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection,
malnutrition, gunshot or knife wounds, nosebleeds, and cardiovascular problems are
often seen as presenting complaints in individuals with Amphetamine-Related Disorders.
A history of childhood Conduct Disorder, Antisocial Personality Disorder, and Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder may be associated with the later development of Amphet-
amine-Related Disorders.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Amphetamine Dependence and Abuse are seen throughout all levels of society and are
more common among persons between ages 18 and 30 years. Intravenous use is more
common among persons from lower socioeconomic groups and has a male-to-female
ratio of 3 or 4:1. The male-to-female ratio is more evenly divided among those with
nonintravenous use.
Prevalence
A community survey conducted in the United States in 1991 reported that 7% of the
population had nonmedical use of amphetamines or amphetamine-like substances one
or more times in their lifetime; 1.3% had used them in the last year; and 0.3% had used
them in the last month. Because the survey assessed patterns of use rather than diagnoses,
it is not known how many of those in the survey who used amphetamines had symptoms
that met criteria for Dependence or Abuse. A community study conducted in the United
States from 1980 to 1985 that used the more narrowly defined DSM-III criteria found that
about 2% of the adult population had Amphetamine Dependence or Abuse at some time
in their lives.Amphetamine-Related Disorders
211
Course
Some individuals who abuse or become dependent on amphetamines or amphetamine-
like substances begin use in an attempt to control their weight. Others become
introduced to these substances through the illegal market. Dependence can occur rapidly
when the substance is used intravenously or smoked. Oral administration usually results
in a slower progression from use to Dependence. Amphetamine Dependence is
associated with two patterns of administration: episodic use or daily (or almost daily)
use. In the episodic pattern, substance use is separated by days of nonuse (e.g., intense
use over a weekend or on one or more weekdays). These periods of intensive high-dose
use (often called "speed runs" or "binges") are often associated with intravenous use.
Runs tend to terminate only when drug supplies are depleted. Chronic daily use may
involve high or low doses and may occur throughout the day or be restricted to only a
few hours. In chronic daily use, there are generally no wide fluctuations in dose on
successive days, but there is often an increase in dose over time. Chronic use of high
doses often becomes unpleasant because of sensitization and the emergence of
dysphoric and other negative drug effects. The few long-term data available indicate
that there is a tendency for persons who have been dependent on amphetamines to
decrease or stop use after 8-10 years. This appears to result from the development of
adverse mental and physical effects that emerge in association with long-term depen-
dence. Little or no data are available on the long-term course of Abuse.
Differential
Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Amphetamine-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g.,
delusions) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Schizophreniform Disorder
versus Amphetamine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions, With Onset During
Intoxication). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis.
Cocaine Intoxication, Hallucinogen Intoxication, and Phencyclidine Intoxi-
cation may cause a similar clinical picture and can sometimes be distinguished from
Amphetamine Intoxication only by the presence of amphetamine metabolites in a urine
specimen or amphetamine in plasma. Amphetamine Dependence and Abuse should be
distinguished from Cocaine, Phencyclidine, and Hallucinogen Dependence and
Abuse. Amphetamine Intoxication and Amphetamine Withdrawal are distinguished from
the other Amphetamine-Induced Disorders (e.g., Amphetamine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication) because the symptoms in these latter disorders
are in excess of those usually associated with Amphetamine Intoxication or Amphet-
amine Withdrawal and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
292.9 Amphetamine-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
The Amphetamine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders
associated with the use of amphetamine (or a related substance) that are not classifiable
as Amphetamine Dependence, Amphetamine Abuse, Amphetamine Intoxication, Am-
phetamine Withdrawal, Amphetamine Intoxication Delirium, Amphetamine-Induced212
Substance-Related Disorders
Psychotic Disorder, Amphetamine-Induced Mood Disorder, Amphetamine-Induced Anx-
iety Disorder, Amphetamine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, or Amphetamine-Induced
Sleep Disorder.
Caffeine-Related Disorders
Caffeine can be consumed from a number of different sources, including coffee
(brewed = 100 mg/6 oz, instant = 65 mg/6 02), tea (40 mg/6 oz), caffeinated soda (45
mg/12 oz), over-the-counter analgesics and cold remedies (25-50 mg/tablet), stimulants
(100-200 mg/tablet), and weight-loss aids (75-200 mg/tablet). Chocolate and cocoa have
much lower levels of caffeine (e.g., 5 mg/chocolate bar). The consumption of caffeine
is ubiquitous in much of the United States, with the average caffeine intake being
approximately 200 mg/day. Some individuals who drink large amounts of coffee display
some aspects of dependence on caffeine and exhibit tolerance and perhaps withdrawal.
However, the data are insufficient at this time to determine whether these symptoms are
associated with clinically significant impairment that meets the criteria for Substance
Dependence or Substance Abuse. In contrast, there is evidence that Caffeine Intoxication
can be clinically significant, and specific text and criteria are provided below. Recent
evidence also suggests the possible clinical relevance of caffeine withdrawal; a set of
research criteria is included on p. 709. The Caffeine-Induced Disorders (other than
Caffeine Intoxication) are described in the sections of the manual with disorders with
which they share phenomenology (e.g., Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder is included
in the "Anxiety Disorders" section). Listed below are the Caffeine-Induced Disorders.
Caffeine-Induced
305.90
292.89
292.89
292.9
Disorders
Caffeine Intoxication (see p. 212)
Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Caffeine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 215)
Caffeine-Induced
Disorders
305.90 Caffeine Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Caffeine Intoxication is recent consumption of caffeine and five or more
symptoms that develop during, or shortly after, caffeine use (Criteria A and B). Symptoms
that can appear following the ingestion of as little as 100 mg of caffeine per day include
restlessness, nervousness, excitement, insomnia, flushed face, diuresis, and gastrointes-
tinal complaints. Symptoms that generally appear at levels of more than 1 g/day include
muscle twitching, rambling flow of thoughts and speech, tachycardia or cardiacCaffeine-Related Disorders
213
arrhythmia, periods of inexhaustibility, and psychomotor agitation. Caffeine Intoxication
may not occur despite high caffeine intake because of the development of tolerance.
The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must
not be due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by another
mental disorder (e.g., an Anxiety Disorder) (Criterion D).
Diagnostic criteria for 305.90 Caffeine Intoxication
A. Recent consumption of caffeine, usually in excess of 250 mg (e.g., more
than 2-3 cups of brewed coffee).
B. Five (or more) of the following signs, developing during, or shortly after,
caffeine use:
(1) restlessness
(2) nervousness
(3) excitement
(4) insomnia
(5) flushed face
(6) diuresis
(7) gastrointestinal disturbance
(8) muscle twitching
(9) rambling flow of thought and speech
(10) tachycardia or cardiac arrhythmia
(11) periods of inexhaustibility
(12) psychomotor agitation
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of func-
tioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., an Anxiety
Disorder).
Other Caffeine-Induced Disorders
The following Caffeine-Induced Disorders are described in other sections of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Caffeine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder (p. 439) and Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder (p. 601). These disorders are
diagnosed instead of Caffeine Intoxication only when the symptoms are in excess of
those usually associated with Caffeine Intoxication and when the symptoms are
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.214
Substance-Related Disorders
Additional Information on
Caffeine-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Mild sensory disturbances (e.g., ringing in the ears and flashes of light) have been
reported at higher doses. Although large doses of caffeine can increase heart rate, smaller
doses can slow the pulse. Whether excess caffeine intake can cause headaches is unclear.
On physical examination, agitation, restlessness, sweating, tachycardia, flushed face, and
increased bowel motility may be seen. Typical patterns of caffeine intake have not been
consistently associated with other medical problems. However, heavy use is associated
with the development or exacerbation of anxiety and somatic symptoms such as cardiac
arrhythmias and gastrointestinal pain or diarrhea. With acute doses exceeding 10 g of
caffeine, grand mal seizures and respiratory failure may result in death. Excessive caffeine
use is associated with Mood, Eating, Psychotic, Sleep, and Substance-Related Disorders,
whereas individuals with Anxiety Disorders are likely to avoid this substance.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Caffeine use and the sources from which caffeine is consumed vary widely across
cultures. The average caffeine intake in most of the developing world is less than
50 mg/day, compared to as much as 400 mg/day or more in Sweden, the United
Kingdom, and other European nations. Caffeine consumption increases during the 20s
and often decreases after age 65 years. Intake is greater in males than in females.
Course
The half-life of caffeine is 2-6 hours, so that most symptoms of intoxication are likely
to last 6-16 hours after caffeine ingestion. Because tolerance to the behavioral effects
of caffeine occurs, Caffeine Intoxication is usually seen in infrequent users or in those
who have recently increased their caffeine intake by a substantial amount.
Differential Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Caffeine-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g., Panic
Attacks) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Panic Disorder versus Caffeine-
Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Panic Attacks, With Onset During Intoxication). See
p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis.
To meet criteria for Caffeine Intoxication, the symptoms must not be due to a
general medical condition or another mental disorder, such as an Anxiety
Disorder, that could better explain them. Manic Episodes, Panic Disorder, Gener-
alized Anxiety Disorder, Amphetamine Intoxication, Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Withdrawal or Nicotine Withdrawal, Sleep Disorders, and medication-
induced side effects (e.g., akathisia) can cause a clinical picture that is similar to that
of Caffeine Intoxication. The temporal relationship of the symptoms to increased caffeine
use or to abstinence from caffeine helps to establish the diagnosis. Caffeine IntoxicationCannabis-Related Disorders
215
is differentiated from Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Onset During
Intoxication (p. 439), and from Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder, With Onset
During Intoxication (p. 601), by the fact that the symptoms in these latter disorder
are in excess of those usually associated with Caffeine Intoxication and are severe
enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
292.9 Caffeine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Caffeine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders
associated with the use of caffeine that are not classifiable as Caffeine Intoxication,
Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder, or Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder. An example is
caffeine withdrawal (see p. 708 for suggested research criteria).
Cannabis-Related Disorders
This section includes problems that are associated with cannabinoids and chemically
similar synthetic compounds. Cannabinoids are substances that are derived from the
cannabis plant. When the upper leaves, tops, and stems of the plant are cut, dried, and
rolled into cigarettes, the product is usually called marijuana. Hashish is the dried,
resinous exudate that seeps from the tops and undersides of cannabis leaves; hashish
oil is a concentrated distillate of hashish. Cannabinoids are usually smoked, but may be
taken orally and are sometimes mixed with tea or food. The cannabinoid that has been
identified as primarily responsible for the psychoactive effects of cannabis is delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (also known as THC, or delta-9-THC). This substance itself is rarely
available for use in a pure form. The THC content of the marijuana that is generally
available varies greatly. The THC content of illicit marijuana has increased significantly
since the late 1960s from an average of approximately 1%—5% to as much as 10%—15%.
Synthetic delta-9-THC has been used for certain general medical conditions (e.g., for
nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy, for anorexia and weight loss in
individuals with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]).
This section contains discussions specific to the Cannabis-Related Disorders. Texts
and criteria sets have already been provided to define the generic aspects of Substance
Dependence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all substances.
Texts specific to Cannabis Dependence and Abuse are provided below; however, there
are no additional specific criteria sets for Cannabis Dependence or Cannabis Abuse.
A specific text and criteria set for Cannabis Intoxication is also provided below.
Symptoms of possible cannabis withdrawal (e.g., irritable or anxious mood accompanied
by physiological changes such as tremor, perspiration, nausea, and sleep disturbances)
have been described in association with the use of very high doses, but their clinical
significance is uncertain. For these reasons, the diagnosis of cannabis withdrawal is not
included in this manual. The Cannabis-Induced Disorders (other than Cannabis Intoxi-
cation) are described in the sections of the manual with disorders with which they share
phenomenology (e.g., Cannabis-Induced Mood Disorder is included in the "Mood
Disorders" section). Listed below are the Cannabis Use Disorders and the Cannabis-
Induced Disorders.216
Substance-Related Disorders
Cannabis Use Disorders
304.30
305.20
Cannabis Dependence (see p. 216)
Cannabis Abuse (see p. 217)
Cannabis-Induced Disorders
292.89
292.81
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.9
Cannabis Intoxication (see p. 217)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
Cannabis Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Cannabis-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Cannabis-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 221)
Cannabis Use Disorders
304.30 Cannabis Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Individuals
with Cannabis Dependence have compulsive use and do not generally develop
physiological dependence, although tolerance to most of the effects of cannabis has
been reported in individuals who use cannabis chronically. There have also been some
reports of withdrawal symptoms, but they have not yet been reliably shown to be
clinically significant. Individuals with Cannabis Dependence may use very potent
cannabis throughout the day over a period of months or years, and they may spend
several hours a day acquiring and using the substance. This often interferes with family,
school, work, or recreational activities. Individuals with Cannabis Dependence may also
persist in their use despite knowledge of physical problems (e.g., chronic cough related
to smoking) or psychological problems (e.g., excessive sedation resulting from repeated
use of high doses).
Specifiers
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Cannabis t Dependence (see
p. 179 for more details):
With Physiological Dependence
Without Physiological Dependence
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
In a Controlled EnvironmentCannabis-Related Disorders
217
305.20 Cannabis Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). Periodic cannabis
use and intoxication can interfere with performance at work or school and may be
physically hazardous in situations such as driving a car. Legal problems may occur asD
consequence of arrests for cannabis possession. There may be arguments with spouses
or parents over the possession of cannabis in the home or its use in the presence of
children. When there are significant levels of tolerance, or when psychological or
physical problems are associated with cannabis in the context of compulsive use, a
diagnosis of Cannabis Dependence, rather than Cannabis Abuse, should be considered.
Cannabis-Induced Disorders
292.89 Cannabis Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Cannabis Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive
behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or shortly after, cannabis use
(Criteria A and B). Intoxication typically begins with a "high" feeling followed by
symptoms that include euphoria with inappropriate laughter and grandiosity, sedation,
lethargy, impairment in short-term memory, difficulty carrying out complex mental
processes, impaired judgment, distorted sensory perceptions, impaired motor perfor-
mance, and the sensation that time is passing slowly. Occasionally, anxiety (which can
be severe), dysphoria, or social withdrawal occurs. These psychoactive effects are
accompanied by two or more of the following signs, developing within 2 hours of
cannabis use: conjunctival injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, and tachycardia
(Criterion C). The symptoms must not be due to a general medical condition and are
not better accounted for by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
Intoxication develops within minutes if the cannabis is smoked, but may take a few
hours to develop if ingested orally. The effects usually last 3-4 hours, the duration being
somewhat longer when the substance is ingested orally. The magnitude of the behavioral
and physiological changes depends on the dose, the method of administration, and the
individual characteristics of the person using the substance, such as rate of absorption,
tolerance, and sensitivity to the effects of the substance. Because most cannabinoids,
including delta-9-THC, are fat soluble, the effects of cannabis or hashish may occasionally
persist or reoccur for 12-24 hours due to a slow release of psychoactive substances from
fatty tissue or to enterohepatic circulation.
Specifier
The following specifier may be applied to a diagnosis of Cannabis Intoxication:
With Perceptual Disturbances. This specifier may be noted when hallucina-
tions with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the
absence of a delirium. Intact reality testing means that the person knows that the
hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent external reality.
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, should be considered.218
Substance-Related Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Cannabis Intoxication
A. Recent use of cannabis.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., impaired motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, sensation of
slowed time, impaired judgment, social withdrawal) that developed
during, or shortly after, cannabis use.
C. Two (or more) of the following signs, developing within 2 hours of
cannabis use:
(1) conjunctival injection
(2) increased appetite
(3) dry mouth
(4) tachycardia
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Specify if:
With Perceptual Disturbances
Other Cannabis-lnduced Disorders
The following Cannabis-lnduced Disorders are described in other sections of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Cannabis Intoxication Delir-
ium (p. 129), Cannabis-lnduced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310), and Cannabis-
lnduced Anxiety Disorder (p. 439). These disorders are diagnosed instead of Cannabis
Intoxication only when the symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with
Cannabis Intoxication and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on
Cannabis-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Cannabis is often used
with other substances, especially nicotine, alcohol, and cocaine. Cannabis (especially
marijuana) may be mixed and smoked with opioids, phencyclidine (PCP), or other
hallucinogenic drugs. Individuals who regularly use cannabis often report both physical
and mental lethargy and anhedonia. Mild forms of depression, anxiety, or irritability are
seen in about one-third of individuals who regularly use cannabis (daily or almost daily).Cannabis-Related Disorders
219
When taken in high doses, cannabinoids have psychoactive effects that can be similar
to those of hallucinogens (e.g., lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD]), and individuals who
use cannabinoids can experience adverse mental effects that resemble hallucinogen-
induced "bad trips." These range from mild to moderate levels of anxiety (e.g., concern
that the police will discover the substance use) to severe anxiety reactions resembling
Panic Attacks. There may also be paranoid ideation ranging from suspiciousness to frank
delusions and hallucinations. Episodes of depersonalization and derealization have also
been reported. Fatal traffic accidents have been found to occur more often in individuals
who test positive for cannabinoids than in the general population. However, the
significance of these findings is unclear because alcohol and other substances are often
also present.
Associated laboratory findings. Urine tests generally identify cannabinoid metab-
olites. Because these substances are fat soluble, persist in bodily fluids for extended
periods of time, and are excreted slowly, routine urine tests for cannabinoids in
individuals who use cannabis casually can be positive for 7-10 days; urine of individuals
with heavy use of cannabis may test positive for 2-4 weeks. A positive urine test is only
consistent with past use; it does not establish Intoxication, Dependence, or Abuse.
Biological alterations include temporary (and probably dose-related) suppression of
immunological function and suppressed secretion of testosterone and luteinizing
hormone (LH), although the clinical significance of these alterations is unclear. Acute
cannabinoid use also causes diffuse slowing of background activity on EEG and rapid
eye movement (REM) suppression.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Cannabis smoke is highly irritating to the nasopharynx and bronchial lining and thus
increases the risk for chronic cough and other signs and symptoms of nasopharyngeal
pathology. Chronic cannabis use is sometimes associated with weight gain, probably
resulting from overeating and reduced physical activity. Sinusitis, pharyngitis, bronchiti
with persistent cough, emphysema, and pulmonary dysplasia may occur with chronic,
heavy use. Marijuana smoke contains even larger amounts of known carcinogens than
tobacco, and heavy use may increase the risk of developing malignant disease.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Cannabis is probably the world's most commonly used illicit substance. It has been taken
since ancient times for its psychoactive effects and as a remedy for a wide range of
medical conditions. Cannabis is among the first drugs of experimentation (often in the
teens) for all cultural groups in the United States. As with most other illicit drugs, Cannabis
Use Disorders appear more often in males, and prevalence is most common in persons
between ages 18 and 30 years.
Prevalence
Cannabinoids, especially cannabis, are also the most widely used illicit psychoactive
substances in the United States, even though lifetime prevalence figures have slowly
decreased from the figures obtained by surveys in the 1980s. A community survey
conducted in the United States in 1991 reported that about one-third of the population220
Substance-Related Disorders
had used marijuana one or more times in their lifetime; 10% had used it in the last year;
and 5% had used it in the last month. Because the survey assessed patterns of use rather
than diagnoses, it is not known how many of those who used marijuana had symptoms
that met criteria for Dependence or Abuse. A community study conducted in the United
States from 1980 to 1985 that used the more narrowly defined DSM-III criteria found that
about 4% of the adult population had Cannabis Dependence or Abuse at some time in
their lives.
Course
Cannabis Dependence and Abuse usually develop over an extended period of time.
Those who become dependent typically establish a pattern of chronic use that gradually
increases in both frequency and amount. With chronic heavy use, there is sometimes a
diminution or loss of the pleasurable effects of the substance. Although there may also
be a corresponding increase in dysphoric effects, these are not seen as frequently as in
chronic use of other substances such as alcohol, cocaine, or amphetamines. A history
of Conduct Disorder in childhood or adolescence and Antisocial Personality Disorder
are risk factors for the development of many Substance-Related Disorders, including
Cannabis-Related Disorders. Few data are available on the long-term course of Cannabis
Dependence or Abuse.
Differential
Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Cannabis-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g., anxiety)
that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Generalized Anxiety Disorder versus
Cannabis-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Generalized Anxiety, With Onset During
Intoxication). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis. Chronic intake of
cannabis can produce symptoms that resemble Dysthymic Disorder. Acute adverse
reactions to cannabis should be differentiated from the symptoms of Panic Disorder,
Major Depressive Disorder, Delusional Disorder, Bipolar Disorder, or Schizo-
phrenia, Paranoid Type. Physical examination will usually show an increased pulse
and injected conjunctivas. Urine toxicological testing can be helpful in making a
diagnosis.
In contrast to Cannabis Intoxication, Alcohol Intoxication and Sedative, Hyp
notic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication frequently decrease appetite, increase aggressive
behavior, and produce nystagmus or ataxia. Hallucinogens in low doses may cause a
clinical picture that resembles Cannabis Intoxication. Phencyclidine (PCP), like cannabis,
can be smoked and also has hallucinogenic effects, but Phencyclidine Intoxication
is much more likely to cause ataxia and aggressive behavior. Cannabis Intoxication is
distinguished from the other Cannabis-Induced Disorders (e.g., Cannabis-Induced
Anxiety Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication) because the symptoms in these latter
disorders are in excess of those usually associated with Cannabis Intoxication and are
severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
The distinction between recreational use of cannabis and Cannabis Dependence
or Abuse can be difficult to make because social, behavioral, or psychological problems
may be difficult to attribute to the substance, especially in the context of use of other
substances. Denial of heavy use is common, and people appear to seek treatment forCocaine-Related Disorders
221
Cannabis Dependence or Abuse less often than for other types of Substance-Related
Disorders.
292.9 Cannabis-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
The Cannabis-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders
associated with the use of cannabis that are not classifiable as Cannabis Dependence,
Cannabis Abuse, Cannabis Intoxication, Cannabis Intoxication Delirium, Cannabis-
Induced Psychotic Disorder, or Cannabis-Induced Anxiety Disorder.
Cocaine-Related Disorders
Cocaine, a naturally occurring substance produced by the coca plant, is consumed in
several preparations (e.g., coca leaves, coca paste, cocaine hydrochloride, and cocaine
alkaloid) that differ in potency due to varying levels of purity and speed of onset. Cocaine
is the active ingredient in each preparation. Chewing coca leaves is a practice generally
limited to native populations in Central and South America, where cocaine is grown.
The use of coca paste, a crude extract of the coca plant, occurs almost exclusively in
cocaine-producing countries in Central and South America, where its nickname is
"basulca." Solvents used in the preparation of coca paste often contaminate the paste
and may cause toxic effects in the central nervous system and other organ systems when
the paste is smoked. Cocaine hydrochloride powder is usually "snorted" through the
nostrils ("snorting") or dissolved in water and injected intravenously. It is sometimes
mixed with heroin, yielding a drug combination known as a "speedball."
A commonly used form of cocaine in the United States is "crack," a cocaine alkaloid
that is extracted from its powdered hydrochloride salt by mixing it with sodium
bicarbonate and allowing it to dry into small "rocks." Crack differs from other forms of
cocaine primarily because it is easily vaporized and inhaled and thus its effects have an
extremely rapid onset. The clinical syndrome and adverse effects that are associated
with crack use are identical to those produced by comparable doses of other cocaine
preparations. Before the advent of crack, cocaine was separated from its hydrochloride
base by heating it with ether, ammonia, or some other volatile solvent. The resulting
"free base" cocaine was then smoked. This process was dangerous because of the risk
that the solvents could ignite and harm the user.
This section contains discussions specific to the Cocaine-Related Disorders. Texts
and criteria sets have already been provided to define the generic aspects of Substance
Dependence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all substances.
Texts specific to Cocaine Dependence and Abuse are provided below; however, there
are no additional specific criteria sets for Cocaine Dependence or Cocaine Abuse.
Specific texts and criteria sets for Cocaine Intoxication and Cocaine Withdrawal are also
provided below. The Cocaine-Induced Disorders (other than Cocaine Intoxication and
Withdrawal) are described in the sections of the manual with disorders with which they
share phenomenology (e.g., Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder is included in the "Mood
Disorders" section). Listed below are the Cocaine Use Disorders and the Cocaine-
Induced Disorders.222
Substance-Related Disorders
Cocaine Use Disorders
304.20
305.60
Cocaine Dependence (see p. 222)
Cocaine Abuse (see p. 223)
Cocaine-Induced Disorders
292.89
292.0
292.81
292.11
292.12
292.84
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.9
Cocaine Intoxication (see p. 223) Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
Cocaine Withdrawal (see p. 225)
Cocaine Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Cocaine-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Cocaine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (see p. 519)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Cocaine-Induced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 229)
Cocaine Use Disorders
304.20 Cocaine Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Cocaine has
extremely potent euphoric effects, and individuals exposed to it can develop Depen-
dence after using cocaine for very short periods of time. An early sign of Cocaine
Dependence is when the individual finds it increasingly difficult to resist using cocaine
whenever it is available. Because of its short half-life, there is a need for frequent dosing
to maintain a "high." Persons with Cocaine Dependence can spend extremely large
amounts of money on the drug within a very short period of time. As a result, the person
using the substance may become involved in theft, prostitution, or drug dealing or may
request salary advances to obtain funds to purchase the drug. Individuals with Cocaine
Dependence often find it necessary to discontinue use for several days to rest or to
obtain additional funds. Important responsibilities such as work or child care may be
grossly neglected to obtain or use cocaine. Mental or physical complications of chronic
use such as paranoid ideation, aggressive behavior, anxiety, depression, and weight loss
are common. Regardless of the route of administration, tolerance occurs with repeated
use. Withdrawal symptoms, particularly dysphoric mood, can be seen, but are usually
transitory and associated with high-dose use.Cocaine-Related Disorders
223
000000000
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Cocaine Dependence (see
p. 179 for more details):
With Physiological Dependence
Without Physiological Dependence
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
On Agonist Therapy
In a Controlled Environment
305.60 Cocaine Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). The intensity and
frequency of cocaine administration is less in Cocaine Abuse as compared with
Dependence. Episodes of problematic use, neglect of responsibilities, and interpersonal
conflict often occur around paydays or special occasions, resulting in a pattern of brief
periods (hours to a few days) of high-dose use followed by much longer periods (weeks
to months) of occasional, nonproblematic use or abstinence. Legal difficulties may result
from possession or use of the drug. When the problems associated with use are
accompanied by evidence of tolerance, withdrawal, or compulsive behavior related to
obtaining and administering cocaine, a diagnosis of Cocaine Dependence rather than
Cocaine Abuse should be considered.
Cocaine-Induced Disorders
292.89 Cocaine Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Cocaine Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive
behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or shortly after, use of cocaine
(Criteria A and B). Cocaine Intoxication usually begins with a "high" feeling and includes
one or more of the following: euphoria with enhanced vigor, gregariousness, hyper-
activity, restlessness, hypervigilance, interpersonal sensitivity, talkativeness, anxiety,
tension, alertness, grandiosity, stereotyped and repetitive behavior, anger, and impaired
judgment, and in the case of chronic intoxication, affective blunting with fatigue or
sadness and social withdrawal. These behavioral and psychological changes are
accompanied by two or more of the following signs and symptoms that develop during
or shortly after cocaine use: tachycardia or bradycardia; pupillary dilation; elevated or
lowered blood pressure; perspiration or chills; nausea or vomiting; evidence of weight
loss; psychomotor agitation or retardation; muscular weakness, respiratory depression,
chest pain, or cardiac arrhythmias; and confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or
coma (Criterion C). Intoxication, either acute or chronic, is often associated with impaired
social or occupational functioning. Severe intoxication can lead to coma. To make aThhh
diagnosis of Cocaine Intoxication, the symptoms must not be due to a general medical
condition and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
The magnitude and direction of the behavioral and physiological changes depend
on many variables, including the dose used and the individual characteristics of the
person using the substance (e.g., tolerance, rate of absorption, chronicity of use, context
in which it is taken). Stimulant effects such as euphoria, increased pulse and blood
pressure, and psychomotor activity are most commonly seen. Depressant effects such
as sadness, bradycardia, decreased blood pressure, and decreased psychomotor activity
are less common and generally emerge only with chronic high-dose use.
000000000
The following specifier may be applied to a diagnosis of Cocaine Intoxication:
With Perceptual Disturbances. This specifier may be noted when hallu-
cinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in
the absence of a delirium. Intact reality testing means that the person knows that
the hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent external
reality. When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a
diagnosis of Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, should
be considered.
Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Cocaine Intoxication
A. Recent use of cocaine.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., euphoria or affective blunting; changes in sociability; hypervigi-
lance; interpersonal sensitivity; anxiety, tension, or anger; stereotyped
behaviors; impaired judgment; or impaired social or occupational
functioning) that developed during, or shortly after, use of cocaine.
C. Two (or more) of the following, developing during, or shortly after,
cocaine use:
(1) tachycardia or bradycardia
(2) pupillary dilation
(3) elevated or lowered blood pressure
(4) perspiration or chills
(5) nausea or vomiting
(6) evidence of weight loss
(7) psychomotor agitation or retardation
(8) muscular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or cardiac
arrhythmias
(9) confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma
(continued)Cocaine-Related Disorders
225
D Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Cocaine Intoxication
(continued)
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Specify if:
With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0 Cocaine Withdrawal
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Withdrawal (see p. 184). The essential
feature of Cocaine Withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal syndrome
that develops within a few hours to several days after the cessation of (or reduction in)
cocaine use that has been heavy and prolonged (Criteria A and B). The withdrawal
syndrome is characterized by the development of dysphoric mood accompanied by two
or more of the following physiological changes: fatigue, vivid and unpleasant dreams,
insomnia or hypersomnia, increased appetite, and psychomotor retardation or agitation.
Anhedonia and drug craving can often be present but are not part of the diagnostic
criteria. These symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must
not be due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by another
mental disorder (Criterion D).
Acute withdrawal symptoms ("a crash") are often seen after periods of repetitive
high-dose use ("runs" or "binges"). These periods are characterized by intense and
unpleasant feelings of lassitude and depression, generally requiring several days of rest
and recuperation. Depressive symptoms with suicidal ideation or behavior can occur
and are generally the most serious problems seen during "crashing" or other forms of
Cocaine Withdrawal. A substantial number of individuals with Cocaine Dependence
have few or no clinically evident withdrawal symptoms on cessation of use.
Diagnostic criteria for 292.0 Cocaine Withdrawal
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) cocaine use that has been heavy and
prolonged.
B. Dysphoric mood and two (or more) of the following physiological
changes, developing within a few hours to several days after Criterion A:
(1) fatigue
(2) vivid, unpleasant dreams
(3) insomnia or hypersomnia
(continued)226
Substance-Related Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 292.0 Cocaine Withdrawal (continued)
(4) increased appetite
(5) psychomotor retardation or agitation
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not clue to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Other Cocaine-Induced Disorders
The following Cocaine-Induced Disorders are described in other sections of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Cocaine Intoxication Delirium
(p. 129), Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310), Cocaine-Induced Mood
Disorder (p. 370), Cocaine-Induced Anxiety Disorder (p. 439), Cocaine-Induced
Sexual Dysfunction (p. 519), and Cocaine-Induced Sleep Disorder (p. 601). These
disorders are diagnosed instead of Cocaine Intoxication or Cocaine Withdrawal only
when the symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the Cocaine
Intoxication or Withdrawal syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on Cocaine-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Cocaine is a short-acting
drug that produces rapid and powerful effects on the central nervous system, especially
when taken intravenously or smoked as "crack." When injected or smoked, cocaine
typically produces an instant feeling of well-being, confidence, and euphoria. Dramatic
behavioral changes can rapidly develop, especially in association with dependence.
Individuals with Cocaine Dependence have been known to spend thousands of dollars
for the substance within very short periods of time, resulting in financial catastrophes
in which savings or homes have been lost. Individuals may engage in criminal activities
to obtain money for cocaine. Erratic behavior, social isolation, and sexual dysfunction
are often seen in the context of long-term Cocaine Dependence. Aggressive behavior
can result from the effects of cocaine; violence is also associated with the cocaine "trade."
Promiscuous sexual behavior either as a result of increased desire or using sex for the
purpose of obtaining cocaine (or for money to purchase cocaine) has become a factor
in the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, including human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV).
Acute Intoxication with high doses of cocaine may be associated with ramblingCocaine-Related Disorders
227
speech, headache, transient ideas of reference, and tinnitus. There may also be paranoid
ideation, auditory hallucinations in a clear sensorium, and tactile hallucinations ("coke
bugs"), which the user usually recognizes as effects of cocaine. Extreme anger with
threats or acting out of aggressive behavior may occur. Mood changes such as
depression, suicidal ideation, irritability, anhedonia, emotional lability, or disturbances
in attention and concentration are common, especially during Cocaine Withdrawal.
Individuals with Cocaine Dependence often have temporary depressive symptoms
that meet symptomatic and duration criteria for Major Depressive Disorder (see
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder, p. 370). Histories consistent with repeated Panic
Attacks, social phobic-like behavior, and generalized anxiety-like syndromes are not
uncommon (see Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder, p. 439). Eating Disorders may
also be associated with this substance. One of the most extreme instances of cocaine
toxicity is Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder (see p. 310), a disorder with delusions
and hallucinations that resembles Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type. Mental disturbances
that occur in association with cocaine use usually resolve within hours to days after
cessation of use, although they can persist for weeks.
Individuals with Cocaine Dependence often develop conditioned responses to
cocaine-related stimuli (e.g., craving on seeing any white powder-like substance). These
responses probably contribute to relapse, are difficult to extinguish, and typically persist
long after detoxification is completed. Cocaine Use Disorders are often associated with
other Substance Dependence or Abuse, especially involving alcohol, marijuana, and
benzodiazepines, which are often taken to reduce the anxiety and other unpleasant
stimulant side effects of cocaine. Cocaine Dependence may be associated with Posttrau-
matic Stress Disorder, Antisocial Personality Disorder, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder, and Pathological Gambling.
Associated laboratory findings. Most laboratories test for benzoylecgonine, a me-
tabolite of cocaine that typically remains in the urine for 1-3 days after a single dose
and may be present for 7-12 days in those using repeated high doses. Mildly elevated
liver function tests can be seen in individuals who inject cocaine or use alcohol
excessively in association with cocaine. Hepatitis, sexually transmitted diseases including
HIV, and tuberculosis may be associated with cocaine use. Pneumonitis or pneumo-
thorax are occasionally observed on chest X ray. Discontinuation of chronic cocaine use
is often associated with EEG changes, alterations in secretion patterns of prolactin, and
down-regulation of clopamine receptors.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions. A
wide range of general medical conditions may occur that are specific to the route of
administration of cocaine. Persons who use cocaine intranasally ("snort") often develop
sinusitis, irritation and bleeding of the nasal mucosa, and a perforated nasal septum.
Those who smoke cocaine are at increased risk for respiratory problems (e.g., coughing,
bronchitis, and pneumonitis due to irritation and inflammation of the tissues lining the
respiratory tract). Persons who inject cocaine have puncture marks and "tracks," most
commonly on their forearms, as seen in those with Opioid Dependence. HIV infection
is associated with Cocaine Dependence due to the frequent intravenous injections and
the increase in promiscuous sexual behavior. Other sexually transmitted diseases,
hepatitis, and tuberculosis and other lung infections are also seen. Cocaine Dependence
(with any route of administration) is commonly associated with signs of weight loss and
malnutrition because of its appetite-suppressing effects. Chest pain may also be a228
Substance-Related Disorders
common symptom. Pneumothorax can result from performing Valsalva-like maneuvers
that are done to better absorb cocaine that has been inhaled. Myocardial infarction,
sudden death from respiratory or cardiac arrest, and stroke have been associated with
cocaine use among young and otherwise healthy persons. These incidents are probably
caused by the ability of cocaine to increase blood pressure, cause vasoconstriction, or
alter the electrical activity of the heart. Seizures have been observed in association with
cocaine use, as have palpitations and arrhythmias. Traumatic injuries due to disputes
resulting in violent behavior are common, especially among persons who sell cocaine.
Among pregnant females, cocaine use is associated with irregularities in placental blood
flow, abruptio placentae, premature labor and delivery, and an increased prevalence of
infants with very low birth weights.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Cocaine use and its attendant disorders affect all race, socioeconomic, age, and gender
groups in the United States. Cocaine-Related Disorders are most commonly found in
persons between ages 18 and 30 years. Although the current cocaine epidemic started
in the 1970s among more affluent individuals, it has shifted to include lower socio-
economic groups living in large metropolitan areas. Rural areas that previously had been
spared the problems associated with illicit drug use have also been affected. Unlike most
other Substance-Related Disorders, with which males are more commonly affected than
females, Cocaine Use Disorders are almost equally distributed between males and
females.
Prevalence
A community survey conducted in the United States in 1991 reported that 12% of the
population had used cocaine one or more times in their lifetime; 3% had used it in the
last year; and less than 1% had used it in the last month. Because the survey assessed
patterns of use rather than diagnoses, it is not known how many of those who used
cocaine had symptoms that met criteria for Dependence or Abuse. A community study
conducted in the United States from 1980 to 1985 that used the more narrowly defined
DSM-III criteria that only recognized Cocaine Abuse found that about 0.2% of the adult
population had Cocaine Abuse at some time in their lives. Among those who had ever
had Cocaine Abuse, 17% reported use in the last month and 46% reported having had
a problem with cocaine in the last year. These figures predate the increased use of
cocaine experienced since the mid-1980s.
Course
As with amphetamines, Cocaine Dependence is associated with either of two patterns
of self-administration: episodic or daily (or almost daily) use. In the episodic pattern,
the cocaine use tends to be separated by 2 or more days of nonuse (e.g., intense use
over a weekend or on one or more weekdays). "Binges" are a form of episodic use that
typically involve continuous high-dose use over a period of hours or days and are often
associated with Dependence. Binges usually terminate only when cocaine supplies are
depleted. Chronic daily use may involve high or low doses and may occur throughout
the day or be restricted to only a few hours. In chronic daily use, there are generally noHallucinogen-Related Disorders
229
wide fluctuations in dose on successive days, but there is often an increase in dose over
time.
Cocaine smoking and intravenous use tend to be particularly associated with a rapid
progression from use to abuse or dependence, often occurring over weeks to months.
Intranasal use is associated with a more gradual progression, usually occurring over
months to years. Dependence is commonly associated with a progressive tolerance to
the desirable effects of cocaine leading to increasing doses. With continuing use, there
is a diminution of pleasurable effects due to tolerance and an increase in dysphoric
effects. Few data are available on the long-term course of Cocaine Use Disorders.
Differential Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Cocaine-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g., depressed
mood) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder
versus Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features, With Onset During
Withdrawal). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis. The marked mental
disturbances that can result from the effects of cocaine should be distinguished from the
symptoms of Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, Bipolar and other Mood Disorders,
Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and Panic Disorder.
Amphetamine Intoxication and Phencyclidine Intoxication may cause a
similar clinical picture and can often only be distinguished from Cocaine Intoxication
by the presence of cocaine metabolites in a urine specimen or cocaine in plasma. Cocaine
Intoxication and Cocaine Withdrawal are distinguished from the other Cocaine-Induced
Disorders (e.g., Cocaine-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication)
because the symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated
with Cocaine Intoxication or Cocaine Withdrawal and are severe enough to warrant
independent clinical attention.
292.9 Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders associ-
ated with the use of cocaine that are not classifiable as Cocaine Dependence, Cocaine
Abuse, Cocaine Intoxication, Cocaine Withdrawal, Cocaine Intoxication Delirium,
Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, Cocaine-
Induced Anxiety Disorder, Cocaine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, or Cocaine-Induced
Sleep Disorder.
Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
This diverse group of substances includes ergot and related compounds (lysergic acid
diethylamide [LSD], morning glory seeds), phenylalkylamines (mescaline, "STP" [2,5-
dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine], and MDMA [3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine;
also called "Ecstasy"]), indole alkaloids (psilocybin, DMT [dimethyltryptamine]), and
miscellaneous other compounds. Excluded from this group are phencyclidine (PCP)230
Substance-Related Disorders
(p. 255) and cannabis and its active compound, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
(p. 215). Although these substances can have hallucinogenic effects, they are discussed
separately because of significant differences in their other psychological and behavioral
effects. Hallucinogens are usually taken orally, although DMT is smoked, and use by
injection does occur.
This section contains discussions specific to the Hallucinogen-Related Disorders.
Texts and criteria sets have already been provided to define the generic aspects of
Substance Dependence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all
substances. Texts specific to Hallucinogen Dependence and Abuse are provided below;
however, there are no additional specific criteria sets for Hallucinogen Dependence or
Hallucinogen Abuse. A specific text and criteria set for Hallucinogen Intoxication is also
provided below. Tolerance develops with repeated use, but a withdrawal from these
substances has not been well documented. For this reason, the diagnosis of hallucinogen
withdrawal is not included in this manual. The Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders (other
than Hallucinogen Intoxication) are described in the sections of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomenology (e.g., Hallucinogen-Induced Mood
Disorder is included in the "Mood Disorders" section). Listed below are the Hallucinogen
Use Disorders and the Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders.
Hallucinogen Use Disorders
304.50
305.30
Hallucinogen Dependence (see p. 230)
Hallucinogen Abuse (see p. 231)
Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
292.89
292.89
292.81
292.11
292.12
292.84
292.89
292.9
Hallucinogen Intoxication (see p. 232)
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (Flashbacks) (see p. 233)
Hallucinogen Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
(see p. 310) Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Hallucinogen-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Hallucinogen-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Hallucinogen-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 236)
Hallucinogen Use Disorders
304.50 Hallucinogen Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Some of the
generic Dependence criteria do not apply to hallucinogens and others require further
explanation. Tolerance has been reported to develop rapidly to the euphoric andHallucinogen-Related Disorders
231
psychedelic effects of hallucinogens but not to the autonomic effects such as pupillary
dilation, hyperreflexia, increased blood pressure, increased body temperature, piloerec-
tion, and tachycardia. Cross-tolerance exists between LSD and other hallucinogens (e.g.,
psilocybin and mescaline). Hallucinogen use, even among individuals with presentations
that meet full criteria for Dependence, is often limited to only a few times a week. This
relatively low frequency of use (as compared with use of other substances) may be
related to the desire to suppress the development of tolerance to the psychological
effects of the hallucinogens. Withdrawal has not been demonstrated, but clear reports
of "craving" after stopping hallucinogens are known. Due to the long half-life and
extended duration of action of most hallucinogens, individuals with Hallucinogen
Dependence often spend hours to days using and recovering from their effects. In
contrast, some hallucinogenic "designer drugs" (e.g., DMT) are quite short acting.
Hallucinogens may continue to be used despite the knowledge of adverse effects (e.g.,
memory impairment while intoxicated; "bad trips," which are usually panic reactions;
or flashbacks). Some individuals who use MDMA (a designer drug with hallucinogenic
effects) describe a "hangover" the day after use that is characterized by insomnia, fatigue,
drowsiness, sore jaw muscles from teeth clenching, loss of balance, and headaches.
Because adulterants or substitutes are often sold as "acid" or other hallucinogens, some
of the reported adverse effects may be due to substances such as strychnine, phen-
cyclidine, or amphetamine. Some individuals can manifest dangerous behavioral reac-
tions (e.g., jumping out of a window under the belief that one can "fly") due to lack of
insight and judgment while intoxicated. These adverse effects appear to be more
common among those who have preexisting mental disorders.
Specifiers
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Hallucinogen Dependence
(see p. 179 for more details):
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
In a Controlled Environment
305.30 Hallucinogen Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). Persons who abuse
hallucinogens use them much less often than do those with Dependence. However,
they may repeatedly fail to fulfill major role obligations at school, work, or home due
to behavioral impairment caused by Hallucinogen Intoxication. The individual may use
hallucinogens in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g., while driving a
motorcycle or a car), and legal difficulties may arise clue to behaviors that result from
intoxication or possession of hallucinogens. There may be recurrent social or interper-
sonal problems due to the individual's behavior while intoxicated, isolated lifestyle, or
arguments with significant others.232
Substance-Related Disorders
Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
292.89 Hallucinogen Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Hallucinogen Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive
behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., marked anxiety or depression, ideas of
reference, fear of losing one's mind, paranoid ideation, impaired judgment, or impaired
social or occupational functioning) that develop during, or shortly after (within minutes
to a few hours), hallucinogen use (Criteria A and B). Perceptual changes develop during
or shortly after hallucinogen use and occur in a state of full wakefulness and alertness
(Criterion C). These changes include subjective intensification of perceptions, deperson-
alization, derealization, illusions, hallucinations, and synesthesias. In addition, the
diagnosis requires that two of the following physiological signs are also present: pupillary
dilation, tachycardia, sweating, palpitations, blurring of vision, tremors, and incoordina-
tion (Criterion D). The symptoms must not be due to a general medical condition and
are not better accounted for by another mental disorder (Criterion E).
Hallucinogen Intoxication usually begins with some stimulant effects such as
restlessness and autonomic activation. Nausea may occur. A sequence of experiences
then follows, with higher doses producing more intense symptoms. Feelings of euphoria
may alternate rapidly with depression or anxiety. Initial visual illusions or enhanced
sensory experience may give way to hallucinations. At low doses, the perceptual changes
frequently do not include hallucinations. Synesthesias (a blending of senses) may result,
for example, in sounds being "seen." The hallucinations are usually visual, often of
geometric forms or figures, sometimes of persons and objects. More rarely, auditory or
tactile hallucinations are experienced. In most cases, reality testing is preserved (i.e., the
individual knows that the effects are substance induced).
Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Hallucinogen
Intoxication
A. Recent use of a hallucinogen.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., marked anxiety or depression, ideas of reference, fear of losing
one's mind, paranoid ideation, impaired judgment, or impaired social
or occupational functioning) that developed during, or shortly after,
hallucinogen use.
C. Perceptual changes occurring in a state of full wakefulness and alertness
(e.g., subjective intensification of perceptions, depersonalization, de-
realization, illusions, hallucinations, synesthesias) that developed dur-
ing, or shortly after, hallucinogen use.
(continued)Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
233
D Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Hallucinogen Intoxication
(continued)
D. Two (or more) of the following signs, developing during, or shortly
after, hallucinogen use:
(1) pupillary dilation
(2) tachycardia
(3) sweating
(4) palpitations
(5) blurring of vision
(6) tremors
(7) incoordination
E. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
292.89 Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder
(Flashbacks)
The essential feature of Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (Flashbacks) is the
transient recurrence of disturbances in perception that are reminiscent of those experi-
enced during one or more earlier Hallucinogen Intoxications. The person must have
had no recent Hallucinogen Intoxication and must show no current drug toxicity
(Criterion A). This reexperiencing of perceptual symptoms causes clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion B). The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition (e.g., anatomical
lesions and infections of the brain or visual epilepsies) and are not better accounted for
by another mental disorder (e.g., delirium, dementia, or Schizophrenia) or by hypno-
pompic hallucinations (Criterion C). The perceptual disturbances may include geometric
forms, peripheral-field images, flashes of color, intensified colors, trailing images (images
left suspended in the path of a moving object as seen in stroboscopic photography),
perceptions of entire objects, afterimages (a same-colored or complementary-colored
"shadow" of an object remaining after removal of the object), halos around objects,
macropsia, and micropsia. The abnormal perceptions that are associated with Halluci-
nogen Persisting Perception Disorder occur episodically and may be self-induced (e.g.,
by thinking about them) or triggered by entry into a dark environment, various drugs,
anxiety or fatigue, or other stressors. The episodes may abate after several months, but
many persons report persisting episodes for 5 years or longer. Reality testing remains
intact (i.e., the person recognizes that the perception is a drug effect and does not
represent external reality). In contrast, if the person has a delusional interpretation
concerning the etiology of the perceptual disturbance, the appropriate diagnosis would
be Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.234
Substance-Related Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Hallucinogen Persisting
Perception Disorder (Flashbacks)
A. The reexperiencing, following cessation of use of a hallucinogen, of one
or more of the perceptual symptoms that were experienced while
intoxicated with the hallucinogen (e.g., geometric hallucinations, false
perceptions of movement in the peripheral visual fields, flashes of color,
intensified colors, trails of images of moving objects, positive after-
images, halos around objects, macropsia, and micropsia).
B. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition (e.g.,
anatomical lesions and infections of the brain, visual epilepsies) and are
not better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., delirium,
dementia, Schizophrenia) or hypnopompic hallucinations.
Other Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
The following Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders are described in other sections of the
manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Hallucinogen Intoxi-
cation Delirium (p. 129), Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310),
Hallucinogen-Induced Mood Disorder (p. 370), and Hallucinogen-Induced Anxi-
ety Disorder (p. 439). These disorders are diagnosed instead of Hallucinogen Intoxi
cation only when the symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the
Hallucinogen Intoxication syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on
Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
When intoxicated with a hallucinogen, individuals may be voluble and discursive and
show rapid alternation of moods. Tearfulness and anxiety may become intense, with
dread of insanity or death. Many hallucinogenic substances have stimulant effects (e.g.,
tachycardia, mild hypertension, hyperthermia, and pupillary dilation) and may cause
some of the features of Amphetamine Intoxication. The perceptual disturbances and
impaired judgment associated with Hallucinogen Intoxication may result in injuries or
fatalities from automobile accidents, physical fights, or attempts to "fly" from high places.
Environmental factors and the personality and expectations of the individual using the
hallucinogen may contribute to the nature and severity of Hallucinogen Intoxication.Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
235
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder may produce considerable anxiety and
concern and may be more common in suggestible persons. Hallucinogen Dependence
and Abuse may co-occur with chronic psychotic conditions. It remains controversial
whether the chronic hallucinogen use produces a Psychotic Disorder de novo, triggers
psychotic symptoms only in vulnerable persons, or is simply an early and continuing
sign of an evolving psychotic process. Hallucinogen Abuse and Dependence also
frequently occur in persons with preexisting adolescent Conduct Disorder or adult
Antisocial Personality Disorder. LSD intoxication may be confirmed by urine toxicology.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Hallucinogens may be used as part of established religious practices. Within the United
States, there are regional differences in their use. Hallucinogen Intoxication usually first
occurs in adolescence, and younger users may tend to experience more disruptive
emotions. Hallucinogen use and Intoxication appear to be three times more common
among males than among females.
Prevalence
A community survey conducted in the United States in 1991 reported that 8% of the
population had used hallucinogens or phencyclidine (PGP) at least one or more times
in their lifetime. The cohort with the highest lifetime use was persons ages 26-34 years,
among whom 26% had ever tried hallucinogens. However, recent use was most common
among those ages 18-25 years, with 2% of this group having used hallucinogens within
the last month. A community study conducted in the United States from 1980 to 1985
that used the more narrowly defined DSM-III criteria found that about 0.3% of the adult
population had Hallucinogen Abuse at some time in their lives.
Course
Hallucinogen Intoxication may be a brief and isolated event or may occur repeatedly.
The intoxication may be prolonged if doses are frequently repeated during an episode.
Frequent dosing, however, tends to reduce the intoxicating effects because of the
development of tolerance. Depending on the drug and its route of administration, peak
effects occur within a few minutes to a few hours, and intoxication ends within a few
hours to a few days after dosing ends. The high prevalence of "ever having used"
hallucinogens among those ages 26-34 years and the lower prevalence of recent use in
that group suggest that many individuals may stop using hallucinogens as they get older.
Some individuals who use hallucinogen report "flashbacks" that are not associated
with any impairment or distress. On the other hand, flashbacks can cause impairment
or distress in some individuals (Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder; see
above).
Differential
Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g.,236
Substance-Related Disorders
delusions) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Schizophreniform Disorder
versus Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions, With Onset During
Intoxication). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis.
Hallucinogen Intoxication should be differentiated from Amphetamine or Phen-
cyclidine Intoxication. Toxicological tests are useful in making this distinction.
Intoxication with anticholinergics can also produce hallucinations, but they are often
associated with physical findings of fever, dry mouth and skin, flushed face, and visual
disturbances. Hallucinogen Intoxication is distinguished from the other Hallucinogen-
Induced Disorders (e.g., Hallucinogen-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Onset During
Intoxication) because the symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with Hallucinogen Intoxication and are severe enough to warrant indepen-
dent clinical attention.
Hallucinogen Intoxication is distinguished from Hallucinogen Persisting Percep-
tion Disorder (Flashbacks) by the fact that the latter continues episodically for weeks
(or longer) after the most recent intoxication. In Hallucinogen Persisting Perception
Disorder, the individual does not believe that the perception represents external reality,
whereas a person with a Psychotic Disorder often believes that the perception is real.
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder may be distinguished from migraine,
epilepsy, or a neurological condition by neuro-ophthalmological history, physical
examination, and appropriate laboratory evaluation.
292.9 Hallucinogen-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
The Hallucinogen-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders
associated with the use of hallucinogens that are not classifiable as Hallucinogen
Dependence, Hallucinogen Abuse, Hallucinogen Intoxication, Hallucinogen Persisting
Perception Disorder, Hallucinogen Intoxication Delirium, Hallucinogen-Induced Psy-
chotic Disorder, Hallucinogen-Induced Mood Disorder, or Hallucinogen-Induced Anxi-
ety Disorder.
InhalanRelated Disorders
This section includes disorders induced by inhaling the aliphatic and aromatic hydro-
carbons found in substances such as gasoline, glue, paint thinners, and spray paints.
Less commonly used are halogenated hydrocarbons (found in cleaners, typewriter
correction fluid, spray-can propellants) and other volatile compounds containing esters,
ketones, and glycols. Most compounds that are inhaled are a mixture of several
substances that can produce psychoactive effects, and it is often difficult to ascertain the
exact substance responsible for the disorder. Unless there is clear evidence that a single,
unmixed substance has been used, the general term inhalant should be used in
recording the diagnosis. These volatile substances are available in a wide variety of
commercial products and may be used interchangeably, depending on availability and
personal preference. Although there may be subtle differences in the psychoactive and
physical effects of the different compounds, not enough is known about their differentialInhalant-Related Disorders
237
effects to distinguish among them. All are capable of producing Dependence, Abuse,
and Intoxication.
Several methods are used to inhale intoxicating vapors. Most commonly, a rag
soaked with the substance is applied to the mouth and nose, and the vapors are breathed
in. The substance may also be placed in a paper or plastic bag and the gases in the bag
inhaled. Substances may also be inhaled directly from containers or from aerosols
sprayed in the mouth or nose. There are reports of individuals heating these compounds
to accelerate vaporization. The inhalants reach the lungs, bloodstream, and target sites
very rapidly.
This section contains discussions specific to the Inhalant-Related Disorders. Texts
and criteria sets have already been provided for generic aspects of Substance Depen-
dence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all substances. Texts
specific to Inhalant Dependence and Abuse are provided below; however, there are no
additional specific criteria sets for Inhalant Dependence or Inhalant Abuse. A specific
text and criteria set for Inhalant Intoxication is also provided below. Tolerance has been
reported among individuals with heavy use, but a withdrawal syndrome from these
substances has not been well documented. For this reason, the diagnosis of inhalant
withdrawal is not included in this manual. The Inhalant-Induced Disorders (other than
Inhalant Intoxication) are described in the sections of the manual with disorders with
which they share phenomenology (e.g., Inhalant-Induced Mood Disorder is included in
the "Mood Disorders" section). Listed below are the Inhalant Use Disorders and the
Inhalant-Induced Disorders. Reflecting their different modes of action and profiles of
associated problems, disorders resulting from the use of anesthetic gases (e.g., nitrous
oxide, ether) and short-acting vasodilators (e.g., amyl or butyl nitrite) are excluded from
the category of Inhalant-Related Disorders and should be classified under Other
Substance-Related Disorders.
Inhalant Use Disorders
304.60 Inhalant Dependence (see p. 238)
305.90 Inhalant Abuse (see p. 238)
Inhalant-Induced Disorders
292.89
292.81
292.82
292.11
Inhalant Intoxication (see p. 239)
Inhalant Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Inhalant-Induced Persisting Dementia (see p. 152)
Inhalant-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.12 Inhalant-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.84 Inhalant-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.89 Inhalant-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.9
Inhalant-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 242)238
Substance-Related Disorders
Inhalant Use Disorders
304.60 Inhalant Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Some of the
generic Dependence criteria do not apply to inhalants, whereas others require further
explanation. Tolerance to the effects of inhalants has been reported among individuals
with heavy use, although its prevalence and clinical significance are unknown. A possible
withdrawal syndrome beginning 24-48 hours after cessation of use and lasting from 2
to 5 days has been described, with symptoms including sleep disturbances, tremor,
irritability, diaphoresis, nausea, and fleeting illusions. However, this syndrome has not
been well documented and appears not to be clinically significant. Thus, Inhalant
Dependence includes neither a characteristic withdrawal syndrome nor evidence of
inhalant use to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms. However, inhalants may be taken
over longer periods of time or in larger amounts than was originally intended, and
individuals who use them may find it difficult to cut down or regulate inhalant use.
Because inhalants are inexpensive, legal, and easily available, spending a great deal of
time attempting to procure inhalants would be rare. However, substantial amounts of
time may be spent on using and recuperating from the effects of inhalant use. Recurrent
inhalant use may result in the individual giving up or reducing important social,
occupational, or recreational activities, and substance use may continue despite the
individual's knowledge of physical problems (e.g., liver disease or central and peripheral
nervous system damage) or psychological problems (e.g., severe depression) caused by
the use.
000000000
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Inhalant Dependence (see
p. 179 for more details):
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
In a Controlled Environment
305.90 Inhalant Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). Individuals who
abuse inhalants may use them in hazardous circumstances (e.g., driving an automobile
or operating machinery when judgment and coordination are impaired by Inhalant
Intoxication). Repeated intake of inhalants may be associated with family conflict and
school problems (e.g., truancy, poor grades, dropping out of school).Inhalant-Related Disorders
239
Inhalant-Induced Disorders
292.89 Inhalant Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Inhalant Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive
behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultiveness, apathy, impaired
judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that develop during, or shortly
after, the intentional use of, or short-term, high-dose exposure to, volatile inhalants
(Criteria A and B). The maladaptive changes are accompanied by signs that include
dizziness or visual disturbances (blurred vision or diplopia), nystagmus, incoordination,
slurred speech, an unsteady gait, tremor, and euphoria. Higher doses of inhalants may
lead to the development of lethargy and psychomotor retardation, generalized muscle
weakness, depressed reflexes, stupor, or coma (Criterion C). The disturbance must not
be due to a general medical condition and is not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (Criterion D).
Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Inhalant Intoxication
A. Recent intentional use or short-term, high-dose exposure to volatile
inhalants (excluding anesthetic gases and short-acting vasodilators).
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., belligerence, assaultiveness, apathy, impaired judgment, impaired
social or occupational functioning) that developed during, or shortly
after, use of or exposure to volatile inhalants.
C. Two
after,
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(or more) of the following signs, developing during, or shortly
inhalant use or exposure:
dizziness
nystagmus
incoordination
slurred speech
unsteady gait
lethargy
depressed reflexes
psychomotor retardation
tremor
generalized muscle weakness
blurred vision or diplopia
stupor or coma
euphoria
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.240
Substance-Related Disorders
Other Inhalant-Induced Disorders
The following Inhalant-Induced Disorders are described in other sections of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Inhalant Intoxication Delir-
ium (p. 129), Inhalant-Induced Persisting Dementia (p. 152), Inhalant-Induced
Psychotic Disorder (p. 310), Inhalant-Induced Mood Disorder (p. 370), and
Inhalant-Induced Anxiety Disorder (p. 439). These disorders are diagnosed instead
of Inhalant Intoxication only when the symptoms are in excess of those usually
associated with Inhalant Intoxication and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on
Inhalant-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with Inhalant
Intoxication may present with auditory, visual, or tactile hallucinations or other percep-
tual disturbances (macropsia, micropsia, illusionary misperceptions, alterations in time
perception). Delusions (such as believing one can fly) may develop during periods of
Inhalant Intoxication, especially those characterized by marked confusion; in some cases,
these delusions may be acted on with resultant injury. Anxiety may also be present.
Repeated but episodic intake of inhalants may first be associated with school problems
(e.g., truancy, poor grades, dropping out of school) as well as family conflict. Use by
older adolescents and young adults is often associated with social and work problems
(e.g., delinquency, unemployment). Most commonly, inhalants are used by adolescents
in a group setting. Solitary use tends to be more typical of those with long-term, heavy
use. The use of inhalants as the predominant substance among those seeking help for
Substance Dependence appears to be rare, but inhalants may be a secondary drug used
by individuals with Dependence on other substances. In some individuals, there may
be a progression to a stage at which inhalants become the preferred substance.
Associated laboratory findings. Direct assay for inhalants is rarely used clinically
and is generally not part of routine screening for drugs of abuse. Damage to muscles,
kidneys, liver, and other organs can result in laboratory tests being indicative of these
pathological conditions.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
The odor of paint or solvents may be present on the breath or clothes of individuals
who use inhalants, or there may be a residue of the substance on clothing or skin. A
"glue sniffer's rash" may be evident around the nose and mouth, and conjunctival
irritation may be noted. There may be evidence of trauma due to disinhibited behavior
or burns due to the flammable nature of these compounds. Nonspecific respiratory
findings include evidence of upper- or lower-airway irritation, including coughing, sinus
discharge, dyspnea, rales, or rhonchi; rarely, cyanosis may result from pneumonitis or
asphyxia. There may also be headache, generalized weakness, abdominal pain, nausea,
and vomiting. Inhalants can cause both central and peripheral nervous system damage,Inhalant-Related Disorders
241
which may be permanent. Examination of the individual who chronically uses inhalants
may reveal a number of neurological deficits, including generalized weakness and
peripheral neuropathies. Cerebral atrophy, cerebellar degeneration, and white matter
lesions resulting in cranial nerve or pyramidal tract signs have been reported among
individuals with heavy use. Recurrent use may lead to the development of hepatitis
(which may progress to cirrhosis) or metabolic acidosis consistent with distal renal
tubular acidosis. Chronic renal failure, hepatorenal syndrome, and proximal renal tubular
acidosis have also been reported, as has bone marrow suppression. Some inhalants (e.g.,
methylene chloride) may be metabolized to carbon monoxide. Death may occur from
respiratory or cardiovascular depression; in particular, "sudden sniffing death" may result
from acute arrhythmia, hypoxia, or electrolyte abnormalities.
Specific Culture, Age, and
Gender Features
Because of their low cost and easy availability, inhalants are often the first drugs of
experimentation for young people, and there may be a higher incidence among those
living in economically depressed areas. Inhalant use may begin by ages 9-12 years,
appears to peak in adolescence, and is less common after age 35 years. Males account
for 70%-80% of inhalant-related emergency-room visits.
Prevalence
Inhalant Dependence and Abuse appear to occur in only a small proportion of
individuals who use inhalants.
Course
It can be difficult to match inhalant dose to effect because the different methods of
administration and the varying concentrations of inhalants in the products used cause
highly variable concentrations in the body. The time course of Inhalant Intoxication is
related to the pharmacological characteristics of the specific substance used, but it is
typically brief, lasting from a few minutes to an hour. Onset is rapid, peaking within a
few minutes after inhaling. Younger children diagnosed as having Inhalant Dependence
may use inhalants several times a week, often on weekends and after school. Severe
dependence in adults may involve varying periods of intoxication throughout each day
and occasional periods of heavier use that may last several days. This pattern may persist
for years, with recurrent need for treatment. Individuals who use inhalants may have a
preferred level or degree of intoxication, and the method of administration (typically
sniffing from a container or breathing through a rag soaked in the substance) may allow
the individual to maintain that level for several hours. Cases have also been reported of
the development of Dependence in industrial workers who have long-term occupational
exposure and access to inhalants. A worker may begin to use the compound for its
psychoactive effects and subsequently develop a pattern of Dependence. Use leading
to Dependence may also occur in people who do not have access to other substances
(e.g., prisoners, isolated military personnel, and adolescents or young adults in isolated
rural areas).242
Substance-Related Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Inhalant-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g., depressed
mood) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder
versus Inhalant-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features, With Onset During
Intoxication). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis.
The symptoms of mild to moderate Inhalant Intoxication can be similar to those of
Alcohol Intoxication and Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication. Breath
odor or residues on body or clothing may be important differentiating clues, but should
not be relied on exclusively. Individuals who chronically use inhalants are likely to use
other substances frequently and heavily, further complicating the diagnostic picture.
Concomitant use of alcohol may also make the differentiation difficult. History of the
drug used and characteristic findings (including odor of solvent or paint residue) may
differentiate Inhalant Intoxication from other substance intoxications; additionally,
symptoms may subside faster with Inhalant Intoxication than with other substance
intoxications. Rapid onset and resolution may also differentiate Inhalant Intoxication
from other mental disorders and neurological conditions. Inhalant Intoxication is
distinguished from the other Inhalant-Induced Disorders (e.g., Inhalant-Induced
Mood Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication) because the symptoms in these latter
disorders are in excess of those usually associated with Inhalant Intoxication and are
severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
Industrial workers may occasionally be accidentally exposed to volatile chemi-
cals and suffer physiological intoxication. The category "Other Substance-Related
Disorders" should be used for such toxin exposures.
292.9 Inhalant-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Inhalant-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders associ-
ated with the use of inhalants that are not classifiable as Inhalant Dependence, Inhalant
Abuse, Inhalant Intoxication, Inhalant Intoxication Delirium, Inhalant-Induced Persisting
Dementia, Inhalant-Induced Psychotic Disorder, Inhalant-Induced Mood Disorder, or
Inhalant-Induced Anxiety Disorder.
Nicotine-Related Disorders
Nicotine Dependence and Withdrawal can develop with use of all forms of tobacco
(cigarettes, chewing tobacco, snuff, pipes, and cigars) and with prescription medications
(nicotine gum and patch). The relative ability of these products to produce Dependence
or to induce Withdrawal is associated with the rapidity characteristic of the route of
administration (smoked over oral over transdermal) and the nicotine content of the
product.
This section contains discussions specific to the Nicotine-Related Disorders. Texts
and criteria sets have already been provided to define the generic aspects of Substance
Dependence (p. 176) that apply across all substances. Text specific to Nicotine
Dependence is provided below. Nicotine intoxication and nicotine abuse are notNicotine-Related Disorders
243
included in DSM-IV; nicotine intoxication rarely occurs and has not been well studied,
and nicotine abuse is not likely to be observed in the absence of Dependence. A specific
text and criteria set for Nicotine Withdrawal is also provided below. Listed below are
the Nicotine-Related Disorders.
Nicotine Use Disorder
305.10
Nicotine Dependence (see p. 243)
Nicotine-Induced Disorder
292.0 Nicotine Withdrawal (see p. 244)
292.9 Nicotine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 247)
Nicotine Use Disorder
305.10 Nicotine Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Some of the
generic Dependence criteria do not appear to apply to nicotine, whereas others require
further explanation. Tolerance to nicotine is manifested by the absence of nausea,
dizziness, and other characteristic symptoms despite using substantial amounts of
nicotine or a diminished effect observed with continued use of the same amount of
nicotine-containing products. Cessation of nicotine use produces a well-defined with-
drawal syndrome that is described below. Many individuals who use nicotine take
nicotine to relieve or to avoid withdrawal symptoms when they wake up in the morning
or after being in a situation where use is restricted (e.g., at work or on an airplane).
Individuals who smoke and other individuals who use nicotine are likely to find that
they use up their supply of cigarettes or other nicotine-containing products faster than
originally intended. Although over 80% of individuals who smoke express a desire to
stop smoking and 35% try to stop each year, less than 5% are successful in unaided
attempts to quit. Spending a great deal of time in using the substance is best exemplified
by chain-smoking. Because nicotine sources are readily and legally available, spending
a great deal of time attempting to procure nicotine would be rare. Giving up important
social, occupational, or recreational activities can occur when an individual forgoes an
activity because it occurs in smoking-restricted areas. Continued use despite knowledge
of medical problems related to smoking is a particularly important health problem (e.g.,
an individual who continues to smoke despite having a tobacco-induced general medical
condition such as bronchitis or chronic obstructive lung disease).
000000000
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Nicotine Dependence (see
p. 179 for more details):
With Physiological Dependence
Without Physiological Dependence244
Substance-Related Disorders
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
On Agonist Therapy
Nicotine-Induced Disorder
292.0 Nicotine Withdrawal
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Withdrawal (see p. 184). The essential
feature of Nicotine Withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal syndrome
that develops after the abrupt cessation of, or reduction in, the use of nicotine-containing
products following a prolonged period (at least several weeks) of daily use (Criteria A
and B). The withdrawal syndrome includes four or more of the following: dysphoric or
depressed mood; insomnia; irritability, frustration, or anger; anxiety; difficulty concen-
trating; restlessness or impatience; decreased heart rate; and increased appetite or weight
gain. The withdrawal symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms
must not be due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by
another mental disorder (Criterion D).
These symptoms are in large part due to nicotine deprivation and are typically more
intense among individuals who smoke cigarettes than among individuals who use other
nicotine-containing products. The more rapid onset of nicotine effects with cigarette
smoking leads to a more intensive habit pattern that is more difficult to give up because
of the frequency and rapidity of reinforcement and the greater physical dependence on
nicotine. In individuals who smoke cigarettes, heart rate decreases by 5 to 12 beats per
minute in the first few days after stopping smoking, and weight increases an average of
2-3 kg over the first year after stopping smoking. Mild symptoms of withdrawal may
occur after switching to low-tar/nicotine cigarettes and after stopping the use of
smokeless (chewing) tobacco, nicotine gum, or nicotine patches.
Diagnostic criteria for 292.0 Nicotine Withdrawal
A. Daily use of nicotine for at least several weeks.
B. Abrupt cessation of nicotine use, or reduction in the amount of nicotine
used, followed within 24 hours by four (or more) of the following signs:
(1) dysphoric or depressed mood
(2) insomnia
(3) irritability, frustration, or anger
(4) anxiety
(5) difficulty concentrating
(continued)Nicotine-Related Disorders
245
D Diagnostic criteria for 292.0 Nicotine Withdrawal (continued)
(6) restlessness
(7) decreased heart rate
(8) increased appetite or weight gain
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Additional Information on
Nicotine-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Craving is an important
element in Nicotine Withdrawal and may account for the difficulty that individuals have
in giving up nicotine-containing products. Other symptoms associated with Nicotine
Withdrawal include a desire for sweets and impaired performance on tasks requiring
vigilance. Several features associated with Nicotine Dependence appear to predict a
greater level of difficulty in stopping nicotine use: smoking soon after waking, smoking
when ill, difficulty refraining from smoking, reporting the first cigarette of the day to be
the one most difficult to give up, and smoking more in the morning than in the afternoon.
The number of cigarettes smoked per day, the nicotine yield of the cigarette, and the
number of pack-years also are related to the likelihood of an individual stopping
smoking. Nicotine Dependence is more common among individuals with other mental
disorders. Depending on the population studied, from 55% to 90% of individuals with
other mental disorders smoke, compared to 30% in the general population. Mood,
Anxiety, and other Substance-Related Disorders may be more common in individuals
who smoke than in those who are ex-smokers and those who have never smoked.
Associated laboratory findings. Withdrawal symptoms are associated with a slow-
ing on EEG, decreases in catecholamine and cortisol levels, rapid eye movement (REM)
changes, impairment on neuropsychological testing, and decreased metabolic rate.
Smoking increases the metabolism of many medications prescribed for the treatment of
mental disorders and of other substances. Thus, cessation of smoking can increase the
blood levels of these medications and other substances, sometimes to a clinically
significant degree. This effect does not appear to be due to nicotine but rather to other
compounds in tobacco. Nicotine and its metabolite cotinine can be measured in blood,
saliva, or urine. Persons who smoke also often have diminished pulmonary function
tests and increased mean corpuscular volume (MCV).246
Substance-Related Disorders
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Nicotine Withdrawal may be associated with a dry or productive cough, decreased heart
rate, increased appetite or weight gain, and a dampened orthostatic response. The most
common signs of Nicotine Dependence are tobacco odor, cough, evidence of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and excessive skin wrinkling. Tobacco stains on the
fingers can occur but are rare. Tobacco use can markedly increase the risk of lung, oral,
and other cancers; cardiovascular and cerebrovascular conditions; chronic obstructive
and other lung diseases; ulcers; maternal and fetal complications; and other conditions.
Although most of these problems appear to be caused by the carcinogens and carbon
monoxide in tobacco smoke rather than by nicotine itself, nicotine may increase the risk
for cardiovascular events. Those who have never smoked but are chronically exposed
to tobacco smoke appear to be at increased risk for conditions such as lung cancer and
heart disease.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
The prevalence of smoking is decreasing in most industrialized nations, but is increasing
in the developing areas. In the United States, the prevalence of smoking is slightly higher
in males than in females; however, the prevalence of smoking is decreasing more rapidly
in males than in females. In other countries, smoking is often much more prevalent
among males.
Prevalence
In the United States, approximately 45% of the general population have never smoked.
The remainder fall into one or more of the following categories: 25% are ex-smokers,
30% currently smoke cigarettes, 4% use pipes or cigars, and 3% use smokeless tobacco.
In the United States, the prevalence of smoking has been decreasing approximately
0.7%-1.0% per year. The lifetime prevalence of Nicotine Dependence in the general
population is estimated to be 20%. In the United States, between 50% and 80% of
individuals who currently smoke have Nicotine Dependence. Lifetime prevalence of
Nicotine Withdrawal among persons who smoke appears to be about 50%. Prospectively,
it is estimated that about 50% of those who quit smoking on their own and about 75%
of those in treatment programs experience Nicotine Withdrawal when they stop smoking.
Course
Smoking usually begins in the early teens. How quickly dependence develops is unclear.
Among those who continue to smoke through age 20 years, 95% become regular, daily
smokers. Of those who successfully quit, less than 25% quit on their first attempt. Most
individuals who smoke have 3-4 failures before they stop smoking for good. In the
United States, about 45% of those who have ever smoked eventually stop smoking.
Withdrawal symptoms can begin within a few hours of cessation, typically peak in
1-4 days, and last for 3-4 weeks. Depressive symptoms postcessation may be associated
with a relapse to smoking. Whether other Nicotine Withdrawal symptoms play a major
role in relapse to smoking is debatable. Increased hunger and weight gain often persist
for at least 6 months. Six months postcessation, 50% of individuals who have quit
smoking report having had a desire for a cigarette in the last 24 hours.Opioid-Related Disorders
247
Familial Pattern
The risk for smoking increases threefold if a first-degree biological relative smokes. Twin
and adoption studies indicate that genetic factors contribute to the onset and continuation
of smoking, with the degree of heritability equivalent to that observed with Alcohol
Dependence.
Differential Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190.
The symptoms of Nicotine Withdrawal overlap with those of other substance
withdrawal syndromes; Caffeine Intoxication; Anxiety, Mood, and Sleep Disor-
ders; and medication-induced akathisia. Admission to smoke-free inpatient units can
induce withdrawal symptoms that might mimic, intensify, or disguise other diagnoses.
Reduction of symptoms associated with the resumption of smoking or nicotine-
replacement therapy confirms the diagnosis.
Because regular nicotine use does not appear to impair mental functioning, Nicotine
Dependence is not readily confused with other Substance-Related Disorders and mental
disorders.
292.9 Nicotine-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
The Nicotine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders
associated with the use of nicotine that are not classifiable as Nicotine Dependence or
Nicotine Withdrawal.
Opioid-Related Disorders
The opioids include natural opioids (e.g., morphine), semisynthetics (e.g., heroin), and
synthetics with morphine-like action (e.g., codeine, hydromorphone, methadone,
oxycodone, meperidine, fentanyl). Medications such as pentazocine and buprenorphine
that have both opiate agonist and antagonist effects are also included in this class because
their agonist properties produce similar physiological and behavioral effects. Opioids
are prescribed as analgesics, anesthetics, antidiarrheal agents, or cough suppressants.
Heroin is one of the most commonly abused drugs of this class and is usually taken by
injection, although it can be smoked or "snorted" when very pure heroin is available.
Fentanyl is injected, whereas cough suppressants and antidiarrheal agents are taken
orally. The other opioids are taken both by injection and orally.
This section contains discussions specific to the Opioid-Related Disorders. Texts and
criteria sets have already been provided for the generic aspects of Substance Dependence
(p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all substances. Texts specific to
Opioid Dependence and Abuse are provided below; however, there are no additional
specific criteria sets for Opioid Dependence or Opioid Abuse. Specific text and criteria248
Substance-Related Disorders
sets for Opioid Intoxication and Opioid Withdrawal are also provided below. The
Opioid-Induced Disorders (other than Opioid Intoxication and Withdrawal) are de-
scribed in the sections of the manual with disorders with which they share phenome-
nology (e.g., Opioid-Induced Mood Disorder is included in the "Mood Disorders"
section). Listed below are the Opioid Use Disorders and the Opioid-Induced Disorders.
Opioid Use Disorders
304.00 Opioid Dependence (see p. 248)
305.50 Opioid Abuse (see p. 249)
Opioid-Induced Disorders
292.89 Opioid Intoxication (see p. 249) Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0
Opioid Withdrawal (see p. 250)
292.81 Opioid Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
292.11 Opioid-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.12 Opioid-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.84 Opioid-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.89 Opioid-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (see p. 519)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
292.89 Opioid-Induced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
292.9
Opioid-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 255)
Opioid Use Disorders
304.00 Opioid Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Most individuals
with Opioid Dependence have significant levels of tolerance and will experience
withdrawal on abrupt discontinuation of opioid substances. Opioid Dependence
includes signs and symptoms that reflect compulsive, prolonged self-administration of
opioid substances that are used for no legitimate medical purpose or, if a general medical
condition is present that requires opioid treatment, that are used in doses that are greatly
in excess of the amount needed for pain relief. Persons with Opioid Dependence tend
to develop such regular patterns of compulsive drug use that daily activities are typically
planned around obtaining and administering opioids. Opioids are usually purchased on
the illegal market, but may also be obtained from physicians by faking or exaggerating
general medical problems or by receiving simultaneous prescriptions from several
physicians. Health care professionals with Opioid Dependence will often obtain opioids
by writing prescriptions for themselves or by diverting opioids that have been prescribed
for patients or from pharmacy supplies.Opioid-Related Disorders
249
000000000
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Opioid Dependence (see
p. 179 for more details):
With Physiological Dependence
Without Physiological Dependence
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
On Agonist Therapy
In a Controlled Environment
305.50 Opioid Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). Legal difficulties may
arise as a result of behavior while intoxicated with opioids or because an individual has
resorted to illegal sources of supply. Persons who abuse opioids typically use these
substances much less often than do those with dependence and do not develop
significant tolerance or withdrawal. When problems related to opioid use are accompa-
nied by evidence of tolerance, withdrawal, or compulsive behavior related to the use
of opioids, a diagnosis of Opioid Dependence, rather than Opioid Abuse, should be
considered.
Opioid-Induced Disorders
292.89 Opioid Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Opioid Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive
behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., initial euphoria followed by apathy, dys-
phoria, psychomotor agitation or retardation, impaired judgment, or impaired social or
occupational functioning) that develop during, or shortly after, opioid use (Criteria A
and B). Intoxication is accompanied by pupillary constriction (unless there has been a
severe overdose with consequent anoxia and pupillary dilation) and one or more of the
following signs: drowsiness (described as being "on the nod") or even coma, slurred
speech, and impairment in attention or memory (Criterion C). Individuals with Opioid
Intoxication may demonstrate inattention to the environment, even to the point of
ignoring potentially harmful events. The symptoms must not be due to a general medical
condition and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder (Criterion D).
The magnitude of the behavioral and physiological changes that result from opioid
use depends on the dose as well as characteristics of the individual using the substance
(e.g., tolerance, rate of absorption, chronicity of use). Symptoms of Opioid Intoxication
usually last for several hours, a time frame that is consistent with the half-life of most
opioid drugs. Severe intoxication following an opioid overdose can lead to coma,
respiratory depression, pupillary dilation, unconsciousness, and even death.250
Substance-Related Disorders
00000000
The following specifier may be applied to a diagnosis of Opioid Intoxication:
With Perceptual Disturbances. This specifier may be noted when hallucina-
tions with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the
absence of a delirium. Intact reality testing means that the person knows that the
hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent external reality.
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, should be considered.
I Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Opioid Intoxication
A. Recent use of an opioid.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., initial euphoria followed by apathy, dysphoria, psychomotor
agitation or retardation, impaired judgment, or impaired social or
occupational functioning) that developed during, or shortly after, opioid
use.
C. Pupillary constriction (or pupillary dilation due to anoxia from severe
overdose) and one (or more) of the following signs, developing during,
or shortly after, opioid use:
(1) drowsiness or coma
(2) slurred speech
(3) impairment in attention or memory
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Specify if:
With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0 Opioid Withdrawal
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Withdrawal (see p. 184). The essential
feature of Opioid Withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal syndrome
that develops after the cessation of (or reduction in) opioid use that has been heavy and
prolonged (Criterion Al). The withdrawal syndrome can be also precipitated by
administration of an opioid antagonist (e.g., naloxone or naltrexone) after a period of
opioid use (Criterion A2). Opioid Withdrawal is characterized by a pattern of signs and
symptoms that are opposite to the acute agonist effects. The first of these are subjective
and consist of complaints of anxiety, restlessness, and an "achy feeling" that is often
located in the back and legs, accompanied by a wish to obtain opioids ("craving") andOpioid-Related Disorders
251
drug-seeking behavior, along with irritability and increased sensitivity to pain. Three or
more of the following must be present to make a diagnosis of Opioid Withdrawal:
dysphoric mood; nausea or vomiting; muscle aches; lacrimation or rhinorrhea; pupillary
dilation, piloerection, or increased sweating; diarrhea; yawning; fever; and insomnia
(Criterion B). Piloerection and fever are associated with severe withdrawal and are not
often seen in routine clinical practice because individuals with Opioid Dependence
usually obtain substances before withdrawal becomes that far advanced. These symp-
toms of Opioid Withdrawal must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms
must not be due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by
another mental disorder (Criterion D).
In most individuals who are dependent on short-acting drugs such as heroin,
withdrawal symptoms occur within 6-24 hours after the last dose. Symptoms may take
2-4 days to emerge in the case of longer-acting drugs such as methadone or LAAM
(L-alphacetylmethadol). Acute withdrawal symptoms for a short-acting opioid such as
heroin usually peak within 1-3 days and gradually subside over a period of 5-7 days.
Less acute withdrawal symptoms can last for weeks to months. These more chronic
symptoms include anxiety, dysphoria, anhedonia, insomnia, and drug craving.
Diagnostic criteria for 292.0 Opioid Withdrawal
A. Either of the following:
(1) cessation of (or reduction in) opioid use that has been heavy and
prolonged (several weeks or longer)
(2) administration of an opioid antagonist after a period of opioid use
B. Three (or more) of the following, developing within minutes to several
days after Criterion A:
(1) dysphoric mood
(2) nausea or vomiting
(3) muscle aches
(4) lacrimation or rhinorrhea
(5) pupillary dilation, piloerection, or sweating
(6) diarrhea
(7) yawning
(8) fever
(9) insomnia
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.252
Substance-Related Disorders
Other Opioid-Induced Disorders
The following Opioid-Induced Disorders are described in other sections of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Opioid Intoxication Delirium
(p. 129), Opioid-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310), Opioid-Induced Mood
Disorder (p. 370), Opioid-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (p. 519), and Opioid-
Induced Sleep Disorder (p. 601). These disorders are diagnosed instead of Opioid
Intoxication or Opioid Withdrawal only when the symptoms are in excess of those
usually associated with the Opioid Intoxication or Withdrawal syndrome and when the
symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on
Opioid-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders.
Opioid Dependence is
commonly associated with a history of drug-related crimes (e.g., possession or distribu-
tion of drugs, forgery, burglary, robbery, larceny, or receiving stolen goods). Among
health care professionals and individuals who have ready access to controlled sub-
stances, there is often a different pattern of illegal activities involving problems with state
licensing boards, professional staffs of hospitals, or other administrative agencies.
Divorce, unemployment, or irregular employment are often associated with Opioid
Dependence at all socioeconomic levels.
For many individuals, the effect of taking an opioid for the first time is dysphoric
rather than euphoric, and nausea and vomiting may result. Individuals with Opioid
Dependence are especially at risk for the development of brief depressive symptoms
and for episodes of mild to moderate depression that meet symptomatic and duration
criteria for Major Depressive Disorder. These symptoms may represent an Opioid-
Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370) or exacerbations of a preexisting primary depressive
disorder. Periods of depression are especially common during chronic intoxication or
in association with psychosocial stressors that are related to the Opioid Dependence.
Insomnia is common, especially during withdrawal. Antisocial Personality Disorder is
much more common in individuals with Opioid Dependence than in the general
population. Posttraumatic Stress Disorder is also seen with increased frequency. A history
of Conduct Disorder in childhood or adolescence has been identified as a significant
risk factor for Substance-Related Disorders, especially Opioid Dependence.
Associated laboratory findings. Routine urine toxicology tests are often positive for
opioid drugs in individuals with Opioid Dependence. Urine tests remain positive for
most opioids for 12-36 hours after administration. Longer-acting opioids (e.g.,
methadone and LAAM) can be identified in urine for several days. Fentanyl is not
detected by standard urine tests but can be identified by more specialized procedures.
Laboratory evidence of the presence of other substances (e.g., cocaine, marijuana,
alcohol, amphetamines, benzodiazepines) is common. Hepatitis screening tests are often
positive, either for hepatitis antigen (signifying active infection) or hepatitis antibodyOpioid-Related Disorders
253
(signifying past infection). Mildly elevated liver function tests are common, either as a
result of resolving hepatitis or from toxic injury to the liver due to contaminants that
have been mixed with the injected opioid. Subtle changes in cortisol secretion patterns
and body temperature regulation have been observed for up to 6 months following
opioid detoxification.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Acute and chronic opioid use are associated with a lack of secretions, causing dry mouth
and nose, slowing of gastrointestinal activity, and constipation. Visual acuity may be
impaired as a result of pupillary constriction. In individuals who use opioids intrave-
nously, sclerosed veins ("tracks") and puncture marks on the lower portions of the upper
extremities are common. Veins sometimes become so badly sclerosed that peripheral
edema develops and individuals switch to veins in the legs, neck, or groin. When these
veins become unusable or otherwise unavailable, individuals often inject directly into
their subcutaneous tissue ("skin-popping"), resulting in cellulitis, abscesses, and circu-
lar-appearing scars from healed skin lesions. Tetanus is a relatively rare but extremely
serious consequence of injecting opioids. Infections may also occur in other organs and
include bacterial endocarditis, hepatitis, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection. Tuberculosis is a particularly serious problem among individuals who use
drugs intravenously, especially those dependent on heroin. Infection with the tubercle
bacillus is usually asymptomatic and evident only by the presence of a positive tuberculin
skin test. However, many cases of active tuberculosis have been found, especially among
those who are infected with HIV. These individuals often have a newly acquired
infection, but also are likely to experience reactivation of a prior infection due to impaired
immune function. Persons who sniff heroin or other opioids ("snorting") often develop
irritation of the nasal mucosa, sometimes accompanied by perforation of the nasal
septum. Difficulties in sexual functioning are common. Males often experience erectile
dysfunction during intoxication or chronic use. Females commonly have disturbances
of reproductive function and irregular menses.
The incidence of HIV infection is high among individuals who use intravenous drugs,
a large proportion of whom are individuals with Opioid Dependence. HIV infection
rates have been reported to be as high as 60% among persons dependent on heroin in
some areas of the United States.
In addition to infections such as cellulitis, hepatitis, HIV, tuberculosis, and endocar-
ditis, Opioid Dependence is associated with a very high death rate—at the level of
approximately 10 per 1,000 per year among untreated persons. Death most often results
from overdose, accidents, injuries, or other general medical complications. Accidents
and injuries due to violence that is associated with buying or selling drugs are common.
In some areas, violence accounts for more opioid-related deaths than overdose or HIV
infection. Physiological dependence on opioids may occur in about half of the infants
born to females with Opioid Dependence; this can produce a severe withdrawal
syndrome requiring medical treatment. Although low birth weight is also seen in children
of mothers with Opioid Dependence, it is usually not marked and is generally not
associated with serious adverse consequences.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Since the 1920s, in the United States, members of minority groups living in economically
deprived areas have been overrepresented among persons with Opioid Dependence.254
Substance-Related Disorders
However, in the late 1800s and early 1900s, Opioid Dependence was seen more often
among white middle-class individuals, suggesting that differences in use reflect the
availability of opioid drugs and other social factors. Medical personnel who have ready
access to opioids may have an increased risk for Opioid Abuse and Dependence.
Increasing age appears to be associated with a decrease in prevalence. This tendency
for Dependence to remit generally begins after age 40 years and has been called
"maturing out." However, many persons have remained opioid dependent for 50 years
or longer. Males are more commonly affected, with the male-to-female ratio typically
being 3 or 4:1.
Prevalence
A community survey conducted in the United States in 1991 reported that 6% of the
population sampled ever used analgesics for nonmedical purposes; 2.5% had used them
within the past year; and 0.7% has used them in the last month. The survey also showed
that 1.3% had used heroin in their lifetime, and 0.2% had used it in the last year (use in
the last month was not reported). Because the survey assessed patterns of use rather
than diagnoses, it is not known how many of those who used analgesics or heroin had
symptoms that met criteria for Dependence or Abuse. A community study conducted in
the United States from 1980 to 1985 that used the more narrowly defined DSM-III criteria
found that 0.7% of the adult population had Opioid Dependence or Abuse at some time
in their lives. Among those with Dependence or Abuse, 18% reported use in the last
month and 42% reported having had a problem with opioids in the last year.
Course
Opioid Dependence can begin at any age, but problems associated with opioid use are
most commonly first observed in the late teens or early 20s. Once Dependence develops,
it is usually continuous over a period of many years, even though brief periods of
abstinence are frequent. Relapse following abstinence is common, even after many years
of incarceration. One exception to the typical chronic course of Opioid Dependence
was observed in service personnel who became dependent on opioids in Vietnam. On
their return to the United States, less than 10% of those who had been dependent on
opioids relapsed, although they experienced increased rates of Alcohol or Amphetamine
Dependence. Few data are available on the course of Opioid Abuse.
Familial Pattern
The family members of individuals with Opioid Dependence are likely to have higher
levels of psychopathology, especially an increased incidence of other Substance-Related
Disorders and Antisocial Personality Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Opioid-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g., depressed
mood) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Dysthymia versus Opioid-
Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features, With Onset During Intoxication).Phencyclidine-Related Disorders
255
See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis. Opioids are less likely to produce
symptoms of mental disturbance than are most other drugs of abuse and, in some
instances, will even reduce such symptoms. In these cases, mental symptoms or disorders
may emerge after opioid use is discontinued.
Alcohol Intoxication and Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication can
cause a clinical picture that resembles Opioid Intoxication. A diagnosis of Alcohol or
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication can usually be made based on the absence
of pupillary constriction or the lack of a response to a naloxone challenge. In some
cases, intoxication may be due both to opioids and to alcohol or other sedatives. In
these cases, the naloxone challenge will not reverse all of the sedative effects. The
anxiety and restlessness associated with Opioid Withdrawal resemble symptoms seen
in Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal. However, Opioid Withdrawal is
also accompanied by rhinorrhea, lacrimation, and pupillary dilation, which are not seen
in sedative-type withdrawal. Dilated pupils are also seen in Hallucinogen Intoxica-
tion, Amphetamine Intoxication, and Cocaine Intoxication. However, others signs
or symptoms of Opioid Withdrawal such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal
cramps, rhinorrhea, or lacrimation are not present. Opioid Intoxication and Opioid
Withdrawal are distinguished from the other Opioid-InducedDisorders (e.g., Opioid-
Induced Mood Disorder, With Onset During Intoxication) because the symptoms in these
latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated with Opioid Intoxication or
Opioid Withdrawal and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
292.9 Opioid-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Opioid-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders associated
with the use of opioids that are not classifiable as Opioid Dependence, Opioid Abuse,
Opioid Intoxication, Opioid Withdrawal, Opioid Intoxication Delirium, Opioid-Induced
Psychotic Disorder, Opioid-Induced Mood Disorder, Opioid-Induced Sexual Dysfunc-
tion, or Opioid-Induced Sleep Disorder.
Phencyclidine
(or Phencfclidine-LikeJ-Related Disorders
The phencyclidines (or phencyclidine-like) substances include phencyclidine (PCP,
Sernylan) and similarly acting compounds such as ketamine (Ketalar, Ketaject) and the
thiophene analogue of phencyclidine (TCP; l-[l-2-thienyl-cyclohexyl]piperidine). These
substances were first developed as dissociative anesthetics in the 1950s and became
street drugs in the 1960s. They can be taken orally or intravenously or can be smoked.
Phencyclidine (sold illicitly under a variety of names such as PCP, Hog, Tranq, Angel
Dust, and PeaCe Pill) is the most commonly abused substance in this class.
This section contains discussions specific to the Phencyclidine-Related Disorders.
Texts and criteria sets have already been provided for the generic aspects of Substance
Dependence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that apply across all substances.
Texts specific to Phencyclidine Dependence and Abuse are provided below; however,
there are no additional specific criteria sets for Phencyclidine Dependence or Phency-
clidine Abuse. A specific text and criteria set for Phencyclidine Intoxication is also256
Substance-Related Disorders
provided below. Although symptoms of phencyclidine withdrawal may occur, their
clinical significance is uncertain, and a diagnosis of phencyclidine withdrawal is not
included in this manual. The Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders (other than Phencyclidine
Intoxication) are described in the sections of the manual with disorders with which they
share phenomenology (e.g., Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder is included in
the "Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders" section). Listed below are the
Phencyclidine Use Disorders and the Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders.
Phencyclidine Use Disorders
304.90
305.90
Phencyclidine Dependence (see p. 256)
Phencyclidine Abuse (see p. 257)
Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders
292.89
292.81
292.11
292.12
292.84
292.89
292.9
Phencyclidine Intoxication (see p. 257)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
Phencyclidine Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
(see p. 310) Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Phencyclidine-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if- With Onset During Intoxication
Phencyclidine-Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if- With Onset During Intoxication
Phencyclidine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 261)
Phencyclidine Use Disorders
304.90 Phencyclidine Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Some of the
generic criteria for Substance Dependence do not apply to phencyclidine. Although
"craving" has been reported by individuals with heavy use, neither tolerance nor
withdrawal symptoms have been clearly demonstrated in humans (although both have
been shown to occur in animal studies). Phencyclidine is usually not difficult to obtain,
and individuals with Phencyclidine Dependence often smoke it at least 2-3 times per
day, thus spending a significant proportion of their time using the substance and
experiencing its effects. Phencyclidine use may continue despite the presence of
psychological problems (e.g., disinhibition, anxiety, rage, aggression, panic, flashbacks)
or medical problems (e.g., hyperthermia, hypertension, seizures) that the individual
knows are caused by the substance. Individuals with Phencyclidine Dependence can
manifest dangerous behavioral reactions due to lack of insight and judgment while
intoxicated. Aggressive behavior involving fighting has been identified as an especially
problematic adverse effect of phencyclidine. As with hallucinogens, adverse reactionsPhencyclidine-Related Disorders
257
to phencyclidine may be more common among individuals with preexisting mental
disorders.
000000000
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Phencyclidine Dependence
(see p. 179 for more details):
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
In a Controlled Environment
305.90 Phencyclidine Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). Although individuals
who abuse phencyclidine use the substance much less often than those with Depen-
dence, they may repeatedly fail to fulfill major role obligations at school, work, or home
because of Phencyclidine Intoxication. Individuals may use phencyclidine in situations
where it is physically hazardous (such as while operating heavy machinery or driving a
motorcycle or car). Legal difficulties may arise due to possession of phencyclidine or to
behaviors resulting from Intoxication (e.g., fighting). There may be recurrent social or
interpersonal problems due to the individual's behavior while intoxicated or to the
chaotic lifestyle, multiple legal problems, or arguments with significant others.
Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders
292.89 Phencyclidine Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Phencyclidine Intoxication is the presence of clinically significant maladaptive
behavioral changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultiveness, impulsiveness, unpredictability,
psychomotor agitation, impaired judgment, or impaired social or occupational function-
ing) that develop during, or shortly after, use of phencyclidine (or a related substance)
(Criteria A and B). These changes are accompanied by two or more of the following
signs that develop within an hour of using the substance (or less when it is smoked,
"snorted," or used intravenously): vertical or horizontal nystagmus, hypertension or
tachycardia, numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain, ataxia, dysarthria, muscle
rigidity, seizures or coma, and hyperacusis (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be
due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (Criterion D).
Specific signs and symptoms are dose related. Lower doses of phencyclidine produce
vertigo, ataxia, nystagmus, mild hypertension, abnormal involuntary movements, slurred
speech, nausea, weakness, slowed reaction times, euphoria or affective dulling, loquac-
ity, and lack of concern. Disorganized thinking, changed body image and sensory
perception, depersonalization, and feelings of unreality occur at intermediate doses.258
Substance-Related Disorders
Higher doses produce amnesia and coma, with analgesia sufficient for surgery, and
seizures with respiratory depression occur at the highest doses. Effects begin almost
immediately after an intravenous or transpulmonary dose, reaching a peak within
minutes. Peak effects occur about 2 hours after oral doses. In milder intoxications, the
effects resolve after 8-20 hours, whereas signs and symptoms of severe intoxications
may persist for several days. Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310) may
persist for weeks.
00000000
The following specifier may be applied to a diagnosis of Phencyclidine Intoxication:
With Perceptual Disturbances. This specifier may be noted when hallucina-
tions with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the
absence of a delirium. Intact reality testing means that the person knows that the
hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent external reality.
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, should be considered.
I Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Phencyclidine
Intoxication
A. Recent use of phencyclidine (or a related substance).
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral changes (e.g., belligerence,
assaultiveness, impulsiveness, unpredictability, psychomotor agitation,
impaired judgment, or impaired social or occupational functioning) that
developed during, or shortly after, phencyclidine use.
C. Within an hour (less when smoked, "snorted," or used intravenously),
two (or more) of the following signs:
(1) vertical or horizontal nystagmus
(2) hypertension or tachycardia
(3) numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain
(4) ataxia
(5) dysarthria
(6) muscle rigidity
(7) seizures or coma
(8) hyperacusis
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
0000000000
With Perceptual DisturbancesPhencyclidine-Related Disorders
259
Other Phertcyclidine-Induced Disorders
The following Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders are described in other sections of the
manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology: Phencyclidine Intox-
ication Delirium (p. 129), Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310),
Phencyclidine-Induced Mood Disorder (p. 370), and Phencyclidine-Induced Anx-
iety Disorder (p. 439). These disorders are diagnosed instead of Phencyclidine
Intoxication only when the symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the
Phencyclidine Intoxication syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention.
Additional Information on
Phencyclidine-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Although individuals with
Phencyclidine Intoxication may remain alert and oriented, they may show delirium,
coma, psychotic symptoms, or catatonic mutism with posturing. Repeated intoxications
may lead to job, family, social, or legal problems. Violence, agitation, and bizarre
behavior (e.g., confused wandering) may occur. Individuals with Phencyclidine Depen-
dence or Abuse may report repeated intoxication-induced hospitalizations, emergency-
room visits, and arrests for confused or bizarre behavior or for fighting. Conduct Disorder
in adolescents and Antisocial Personality Disorder in adults may be associated with
phencyclidine use. Dependence on other substances (especially cocaine, alcohol, and
amphetamines) is common among those who have Phencyclidine Dependence.
Associated laboratory findings. Phencyclidine (or a related substance) is present
in the urine of individuals who are acutely intoxicated with one of these substances.
The substance may be detectable in urine for several weeks after the end of prolonged
or very high dose use. Phencyclidine may be detected more readily in acidic urine.
Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SCOT)
are often elevated.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Phencyclidine Intoxication produces extensive cardiovascular and neurological (e.g.,
seizures, dystonias, dyskinesias, catalepsy, and hypothermia or hyperthermia) toxicity.
In those with Phencyclidine Dependence or Abuse, there may be physical evidence of
injuries from accidents, fights, and falls. Needle tracks, hepatitis, human immunodefici-
ency virus (HIV) disease, and bacterial endocarditis may be found among the relatively
few individuals who take phencyclidine intravenously. Drowning, even in small volumes
of water, has been reported. Respiratory problems arise with apnea, bronchospasm,
bronchorrhea, aspiration during coma, and hypersalivation. Rhabdomyolysis with renal
impairment is seen in about 2% of individuals who seek emergency care. Cardiac arrest
is a rare outcome.260
Substance-Related Disorders
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
The prevalence of phencyclidine-related problems appears to be higher among males
(about twofold), among those between ages 20 and 40 years, and among ethnic
minorities (about twofold). Males compose about three-quarters of those with phen-
cyclidine-related emergency-room visits.
Prevalence
Medical examiners nationally report that phencyclidine is involved in about 3% of deaths
associated with substance use. It is mentioned as a problem in about 3% of substance-
related emergency-room visits. The percentage of high-school seniors who report ever
having used phencyclidine fell from about 13% in 1980 to about 3% in 1990.
Differential
Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders may be characterized by symptoms (e.g.,
depressed mood) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Major Depressive
Disorder versus Phencyclidine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features, With
Onset During Intoxication). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis.
Recurring episodes of psychotic or mood symptoms due to Phencyclidine Intoxication
may mimic Schizophrenia or Mood Disorders. History or laboratory evidence of
phencyclidine use establishes a role for the substance, but does not rule out the
co-occurrence of other primary mental disorders. Rapid onset of symptoms also suggests
Phencyclidine Intoxication rather than Schizophrenia, but phencyclidine use may induce
acute psychotic episodes in individuals with preexisting Schizophrenia. Rapid resolution
of symptoms and the absence of a history of Schizophrenia may aid in this differentiation.
Drug-related violence or impaired judgment may co-occur with, or may mimic aspects
of, Conduct Disorder or Antisocial Personality Disorder. Absence of behavioral
problems before the onset of substance use, or during abstinence, may help to clarify
this differentiation.
Phencyclidine and related substances may produce perceptual disturbances (e.g.,
scintillating lights, perception of sounds, illusions, or formed visual images) that the
person usually recognizes as resulting from the drug use. If reality testing remains intact
and the person neither believes that the perceptions are real nor acts on them, the
specifier With Perceptual Disturbances is noted for Phencyclidine Intoxication. If reality
testing is impaired, the diagnosis of Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder
should be considered.
Differentiating Phencyclidine Intoxication from other Substance Intoxications
(with which it often coexists) depends on a history of having taken the substance, the
presence of characteristic findings (e.g., nystagmus and mild hypertension), and positive
urine toxicological tests. Individuals who use phencyclidine often use other drugs as
well, and comorbid Abuse or Dependence on other drugs must be considered.
Phencyclidine Intoxication is distinguished from the other Phencyclidine-Induced
Disorders (e.g., Phencyclidine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Onset During Intoxica-
tion) because the symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with Phencyclidine Intoxication and are severe enough to warrant indepen-
dent clinical attention.Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
261
292.9 Phencyclidine-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
The Phencyclidine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders
associated with the use of phencyclidine that are not classifiable as Phencyclidine
Dependence, Phencyclidine Abuse, Phencyclidine Intoxication, Phencyclidine Intoxica-
tion Delirium, Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, Phencyclidine-Induced Mood
Disorder, or Phencyclidine-Induced Anxiety Disorder.
0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
00000000000000000000000000000000000
The sedative, hypnotic, and anxiolytic (antianxiety) substances include the benzodiaze-
pines, the carbamates (e.g., glutethimide, meprobamate), the barbiturates (e.g., secobar-
bital), and the barbiturate-like hypnotics (e.g., glutethimide, methaqualone). This class
of substances includes all prescription sleeping medications and almost all prescription
antianxiety medications. The nonbenzodiazepine antianxiety agents (e.g., buspirone,
gepirone) are not included in this class. Some medications in this class have other
important clinical uses (e.g., as anticonvulsants). Like alcohol, these agents are brain
depressants and can produce similar Substance-Induced and Substance Use Disorders.
At high doses, sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics can be lethal, particularly when
mixed with alcohol. Sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics are available both by prescrip-
tion and from illegal sources. Occasionally, individuals who obtain these substances by
prescription will abuse them; conversely, some of those who purchase substances from
this class "on the street" do not develop Dependence or Abuse. Medications with rapid
onset and/or short to intermediate lengths of action may be especially vulnerable to
being abused.
This section contains discussions specific to the Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-
Related Disorders. Texts and criteria sets have already been provided to define the
generic aspects of Substance Dependence (p. 176) and Substance Abuse (p. 182) that
apply across all substances. Texts specific to Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Depen-
dence and Abuse are provided below; however, there are no additional specific criteria
sets for Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence or Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Abuse. Specific texts and criteria sets for Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Intoxication and Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal are also provided below.
The Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders (other than Sedative, Hyp-
notic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication and Withdrawal) are described in the sections of the
manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (e.g., Sedative-, Hypnotic-,
or Anxiolytic-Induced Anxiety Disorder is included in the "Anxiety Disorders" section).
Listed below are the Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorders and the Sedative-,
Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorders
304.10
305.40
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence (see p. 262)
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Abuse (see p. 263)262
Substance-Related Disorders
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Disorders
292.89
292.0
292.81
292.81
292.82
292.83
292.11
292.12
292.84
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.9
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication (see p. 263)
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal (see p. 264)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication Delirium (see p. 129)
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal Delirium (see p. 129)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Persisting Dementia
(see p. 152)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Persisting Amnestic
Disorder (see p. l6l)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Psychotic Disorder,
With Delusions (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Psychotic Disorder,
With Hallucinations (see p. 310)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Anxiety Disorder
(see p. 439) Specify if: With Onset During Withdrawal
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Sexual Dysfunction
(see p. 519) Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-lnduced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified (see p. 269)
Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Use Disorders
304.10 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Dependence (see p. 176). Very significant
levels of physiological dependence, marked by both tolerance and withdrawal, can
develop to the sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics. The timing and severity of the
withdrawal syndrome will differ depending on the specific substance and its pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics. For example, withdrawal from shorter-acting sub-
stances that are rapidly absorbed and that have no active metabolites (e.g., triazolam)
can begin within hours after the substance is stopped; withdrawal from substances with
long-acting metabolites (e.g., diazepam) may not begin for 1-2 days or longer. The
withdrawal syndrome produced by substances in this class may be characterized by the
development of a delirium that can be life threatening. There may be evidence of
tolerance and withdrawal in the absence of a diagnosis of Substance Dependence in an
individual who has abruptly discontinued benzodiazepines that were taken for longSedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
263
periods of time at prescribed and therapeutic doses. A diagnosis of Substance Depen-
dence should be considered only when, in addition to having physiological dependence,
the individual using the substance shows evidence of a range of problems (e.g., an
individual who has developed drug-seeking behavior to the extent that important
activities are given up or reduced to obtain the substance).
000000000
The following specifiers may be applied to a diagnosis of Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Dependence (see p. 179 for more details):
With Physiological Dependence
Without Physiological Dependence
Early Full Remission
Early Partial Remission
Sustained Full Remission
Sustained Partial Remission
On Agonist Therapy
In a Controlled Environment
305.40 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Abuse
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Abuse (see p. 182). Abuse of substances
from this class may occur on its own or in conjunction with use of other substances. For
example, individuals may use intoxicating doses of sedatives or benzodiazepines to
"come down" from cocaine or amphetamines or use high doses of benzodiazepines in
combination with methadone to "boost" its effects. Abuse of substances from this class
may result in use in hazardous situations, such as getting "high" and then driving. The
individual may miss work or school or neglect home duties as a result of intoxication
or get into arguments with spouses or parents about episodes of substance use. When
these problems are accompanied by evidence of tolerance, withdrawal, or compulsive
behavior related to the use of sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics, a diagnosis of Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence should be considered.
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders
292.89 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Intoxication (see p. 183). The essential
feature of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication is the presence of clinically
significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual
or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment, impaired social or occupa-
tional functioning) that develop during, or shortly after, use of a sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic substance (Criteria A and B). As with other brain depressants, these behaviors264
Substance-Related Disorders
may be accompanied by slurred speech, an unsteady gait, nystagmus, memory or
attentional problems, levels of incoordination that can interfere with driving abilities and
with performing usual activities to the point of causing accidents, and stupor or coma
(Criterion C). Memory impairment is a prominent feature of Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Intoxication and is most often characterized by an anterograde amnesia
that resembles "alcoholic blackouts," which can be quite disturbing to the individual.
The symptoms must not be due to a general medical condition and are not better
accounted for by another mental disorder (Criterion D). Intoxication may occur in
individuals who are receiving these substances by prescription, are borrowing the
medication from friends or relatives, or are deliberately taking the substance to
achieve intoxication.
Diagnostic criteria for 292.89 Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Intoxication
A. Recent use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes
(e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, im-
paired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that
developed during, or shortly after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
C. One (or more) of the following signs, developing during, or shortly after,
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use:
(1) slurred speech
(2) incoordination
(3) unsteady gait
(4) nystagmus
(5) impairment in attention or memory
(6) stupor or coma
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
292.0 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal
Also refer to the text and criteria for Substance Withdrawal (see p. 184). The essential
feature of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic
syndrome that develops after a marked decrease in or cessation of intake after several
weeks or more of regular use (Criteria A and B). This withdrawal syndrome is
characterized by two or more symptoms (similar to Alcohol Withdrawal) that include
autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., increases in heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure,
or body temperature, along with sweating); a tremor of the hands; insomnia, anxiety,Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
265
and nausea sometimes accompanied by vomiting; and psychomotor agitation. A grand
mal seizure may occur in perhaps as many as 20%-30% of individuals undergoing
untreated withdrawal from these substances. In severe Withdrawal, visual, tactile, or
auditory hallucinations or illusions can occur. If the person's reality testing is intact (i.e.,
he or she knows the substance is causing the hallucinations) and the illusions occur in
a clear sensorium, the specifier With Perceptual Disturbances can be noted (see below).
The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be due
to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (e.g., Alcohol Withdrawal or Generalized Anxiety Disorder) (Criterion D). Relief
of withdrawal symptoms with administration of any sedative-hypnotic agent would
support a diagnosis of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal.
The withdrawal syndrome is characterized by signs and symptoms that are generally
the opposite of the acute effects that are likely to be observed in a first-time user of
these agents. The time course of the withdrawal syndrome is generally predicted by the
half-life of the substance. Medications whose actions typically last about 10 hours or less
(e.g., lorazepam, oxazepam, and temazepam) produce withdrawal symptoms within
6-8 hours of decreasing blood levels that peak in intensity on the second day and
improve markedly by the fourth or fifth day. For substances with longer half-lives (e.g.,
diazepam), symptoms may not develop for more than a week, peak in intensity during
the second week, and decrease markedly during the third or fourth week. There may
be additional longer-term symptoms at a much lower level of intensity that persist for
several months. As with alcohol, these lingering withdrawal symptoms (e.g., anxiety,
moodiness, and trouble sleeping) can be mistaken for non-substance-induced Anxiety
or Depressive Disorders (e.g., Generalized Anxiety Disorder).
The longer the substance has been taken and the higher the dosages used, the more
likely it is that there will be severe Withdrawal. However, Withdrawal has been reported
with as little as 15 mg of diazepam (or its equivalent in other benzodiazepines) when
taken daily for several months. Dosages of approximately 40 mg of diazepam (or its
equivalent) daily are more likely to produce clinically relevant withdrawal symptoms,
and even higher doses (e.g., 100 mg of diazepam) are more likely to be followed by
withdrawal seizures or delirium. Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal Delirium
(see p. 129) is characterized by disturbances in consciousness and cognition, with visual,
tactile, or auditory hallucinations. When present, Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Withdrawal Delirium should be diagnosed instead of Withdrawal.
00000000
The following specifier may be applied to a diagnosis of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Withdrawal:
With Perceptual Disturbances. This specifier may be noted when hallucin-
ations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the
absence of a delirium. Intact reality testing means that the person knows that the
hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent external reality.
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, should be con-
sidered.266
Substance-Related Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for 292.0 Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Withdrawal
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use that
has been heavy and prolonged.
B. Two (or more) of the following, developing within several hours to a
few days after Criterion A:
(1) autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate
greater than 100)
(2) increased hand tremor
(3) insomnia
(4) nausea or vomiting
(5) transient visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions
(6) psychomotor agitation
(7) anxiety
(8) grand mal seizures
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of func-
tioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition and are not
better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Specify if:
With Perceptual Disturbances
Other Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders
The following Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders are described in
other sections of the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology:
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication Delirium (p. 129), Sedative, Hyp-
notic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal Delirium (p. 129), Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting Dementia (p. 152), Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or An-
xiolytic-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder (p. 161), Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Psychotic Disorder (p. 310), Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or An-
xiolytic-Induced Mood Disorder (p. 370), Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-
Induced Anxiety Disorder (p. 439), Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced
Sexual Dysfunction (p. 519), and Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced
Sleep Disorder (p. 601). These disorders are diagnosed instead of Sedative, Hypnotic,
or Anxiolytic Intoxication or Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal only when
the symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Intoxication or Withdrawal syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently
severe to warrant independent clinical attention.Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
267
Additional Information on
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Dependence and Abuse may often be associated with Dependence on, or
Abuse of, other substances (e.g., alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, heroin, amphetamines).
Sedatives are often used to alleviate the unwanted effects of these other substances.
Acute Intoxication can result in accidental injury through falls and automobile accidents.
For elderly individuals, even short-term use of these sedating medications at prescribed
doses can be associated with an increased risk for cognitive problems and falls. Some
data indicate that the disinhibiting effects of these agents can, like alcohol, actually
contribute to overly aggressive behavior, with subsequent interpersonal and legal
problems. Intense or repeated Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication may be
associated with severe depressions that, although temporary, can be intense enough to
lead to suicide attempts and completed suicides. Accidental or deliberate overdoses,
similar to those observed for Alcohol Abuse or Dependence or repeated Alcohol
Intoxication, can occur. In contrast to their wide margin of safety when used alone,
benzodiazepines taken in combination with alcohol appear to be particularly dangerous,
and accidental overdoses have been reported. Accidental overdoses have also been
reported in individuals who deliberately abuse barbiturates and other nonbenzodiaze-
pine sedatives (e.g., methaqualone). With repeated use in search of euphoria, tolerance
develops to the sedative effects, and a progressively higher dose is used. However,
tolerance to brain stem depressant effects develops much more slowly, and as the person
takes more substance to achieve euphoria, there may be a sudden onset of respiratory
depression and hypotension, which may result in death. Antisocial behavior and
Antisocial Personality Disorder are associated with Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Dependence and Abuse, especially when the substances are obtained illegally.
Associated laboratory findings. Almost all of these substances can be identified
through laboratory evaluations of urine or blood (which can quantify the amounts of
these agents in the body). Urine tests are likely to remain positive for up to a week or
so after the use of long-acting substances (e.g., flurazepam).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Physical examination is likely to reveal evidence of a mild decrease in most aspects of
autonomic nervous system functioning, including a slower pulse, a slightly decreased
respiratory rate, and a slight drop in blood pressure (most likely to occur with postural
changes). Overdoses of sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics may be associated with a
deterioration in vital signs that may signal an impending medical emergency (e.g.,
respiratory arrest from barbiturates). There may be consequences of trauma (e.g., internal
bleeding or a subdural hematoma) from accidents that occur while intoxicated.
Intravenous use of these substances can result in medical complications related to the
use of contaminated needles (e.g., hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]
infection).268
Substance-Related Disorders
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
There are marked variations in prescription patterns (and availability) of this class of
substances in different countries, which may lead to variations in prevalence of Sedative-,
Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders. Deliberate Intoxication to achieve a "high"
is most likely to be observed in teenagers and individuals in their 20s. Withdrawal,
Dependence, and Abuse are also seen in individuals in their 40s and older who escalate
the dose of prescribed medications. Both acute and chronic toxic effects of these
substances, especially effects on cognition, memory, and motor coordination, are likely
to increase with age as a consequence of pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
age-related changes. Individuals with dementia are more likely to develop Intoxication
and impaired physiological functioning at lower doses. Women may be at higher risk
for prescription drug abuse of substances of this class.
Prevalence
In the United States, up to 90% of individuals hospitalized for medical care or surgery
receive orders for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications during their hospital stay,
and more than 15% of American adults use these medications (usually by prescription)
during any 1 year. Most of these individuals take the medication as directed, without
evidence of misuse. Among the medications in this class, the benzodiazepines are the
most widely used, with perhaps 10% of adults having taken a benzodiazepine for at
least 1 month during the prior year. A community survey conducted in the United States
in 1991 reported that about 4% of the population sampled had ever used sedatives for
nonmedical purposes; approximately 1% had such use in the last year; and 0.4% in the
last month. For antianxiety agents, around 6% of the population had ever used them for
nonmedical purposes; almost 2% had such use in the last year; and 0.5% in the last
month. Because the survey assessed patterns of use rather than diagnoses, it is not known
how many of those who used substances from this class had symptoms that met criteria
for Dependence or Abuse. A community study conducted in the United States from 1980
to 1985 that used the more narrowly defined DSM-III criteria found that 1.1% of the
population surveyed had met criteria for Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Abuse or
Dependence at some time in their lives.
Course
The more usual course involves young people in their teens or 20s who may escalate
their "recreational" use of sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics to the point at which
they develop problems that might qualify for a diagnosis of Dependence or Abuse. This
pattern may be especially likely among individuals who have other Substance Use
Disorders (e.g., related to alcohol, opioids, cocaine, amphetamine). An initial pattern of
intermittent use at parties can lead to daily use and high levels of tolerance. Once this
occurs, an increasing level of interpersonal, work, and legal difficulties, as well as
increasingly severe episodes of memory impairment and physiological withdrawal, can
be expected to ensue.
The second and less frequently observed clinical course begins with an individual
who originally obtained the medication by prescription from a physician, usually for the
treatment of anxiety, insomnia, or somatic complaints. Although the great majority of
those who are prescribed a medication from this class do not develop problems, a smallSedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
269
proportion do. In these individuals, as either tolerance or a need for higher doses of the
medication develops, there is a gradual increase in the dose and frequency of
self-administration. The person is likely to continue to justify use on the basis of the
original symptoms of anxiety or insomnia, but substance-seeking behavior becomes
more prominent and the person may seek out multiple physicians to obtain sufficient
supplies of the medication. Tolerance can reach high levels, and Withdrawal (including
seizures and Withdrawal Delirium) may occur. Other individuals at heightened risk might
include those with Alcohol Dependence who may receive repeated prescriptions in
response to their complaints of alcohol-related anxiety or insomnia.
Differential
Diagnosis
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders, see
p. 190. Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders may present with symp-
toms (e.g., anxiety) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., Generalized Anxiety
Disorder versus Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With
Onset During Withdrawal). See p. 193 for a discussion of this differential diagnosis.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication closely resembles Alcohol Intoxica-
tion, except for the smell of alcohol on the breath. In older persons, the clinical picture
of intoxication can resemble a progressive dementia. In addition, the slurred speech,
incoordination, and other associated features characteristic of Sedative, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Intoxication could be the result of a general medical condition (e.g.,
multiple sclerosis) or of a prior head trauma (e.g., a subdural hematoma).
Alcohol Withdrawal produces a syndrome very similar to that of Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal. The anxiety, insomnia, and autonomic nervous
system hyperactivity that is a consequence of intoxication with other drugs (e.g.,
stimulants such as amphetamines or cocaine), that are consequences of physiological
conditions (e.g., hyperthyroidism), or that are related to primary Anxiety Disorders
(e.g., Panic Disorder or Generalized Anxiety Disorder) can resemble some aspects of
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication and Withdrawal are distinguished
from the other Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders (e.g., Seda-
tive-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Onset During With-
drawal) because the symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually
associated with Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication or Withdrawal and are
severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
It should be noted that there are individuals who continue to take benzodiazepine
medication according to a physician's direction for a legitimate medical indication over
extended periods of time. Even if physiologically dependent on the medication, many
of these individuals do not develop symptoms that meet the criteria for Dependence
because they are not preoccupied with obtaining the substance and its use does not
interfere with their performance of usual social or occupational roles.
292.9 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
category is for disorders associated with the use of sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics270
Substance-Related Disorders
that are not classifiable as Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence; Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Abuse; Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication; Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal; Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
Delirium; Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal Delirium; Sedative-, Hypnotic-,
or Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting Dementia; Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced
Persisting Amnestic Disorder; Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Psychotic
Disorder; Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Mood Disorder; Sedative-, Hyp-
notic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Anxiety Disorder; Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-
Induced Sexual Dysfunction; or Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Sleep
Disorder.
Polysbstance-Related Disorders
304.80 Polysubstanee Dependence
This diagnosis is reserved for behavior during the same 12-month period in which the
person was repeatedly using at least three groups of substances (not including caffeine
and nicotine), but no single substance predominated. Further, during this period, the
Dependence criteria were met for substances as a group but not for any specific
substance.
Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Related Disorders
The Other (or Unknown) Substance—Related Disorders category is for classifying
Substance-Related Disorders associated with substances not listed above. Examples of
these substances, which are described in more detail below, include anabolic steroids,
nitrite inhalants ("poppers"), nitrous oxide, over-the-counter and prescription medica-
tions not otherwise covered by the 11 categories (e.g., cortisol, antihistamines, benztro-
pine), and other substances that have psychoactive effects. In addition, this category
may be used when the specific substance is unknown (e.g., an intoxication after taking
a bottle of unlabeled pills).
Anabolic steroids sometimes produce an initial sense of enhanced well-being (or
even euphoria), which is replaced after repeated use by lack of energy, irritability, and
other forms of dysphoria. Continued use of these substances may lead to more severe
symptoms (e.g., depressive symptomatology) and general medical conditions (liver
disease).
Nitrite inhalants ("poppers"—forms of amyl, butyl, and isobutyl nitrite) produce
an intoxication that is characterized by a feeling of fullness in the head, mild euphoria,
a change in the perception of time, relaxation of smooth muscles, and a possible increase
in sexual feelings. In addition to possible compulsive use, these substances carry dangers
of potential impairment of immune functioning, irritation of the respiratory system, a
decrease in the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood, and a toxic reaction that can
include vomiting, severe headache, hypotension, and dizziness.Other (or Unknown) Substance-Related Disorders
271
Nitrous oxide ("laughing gas") causes rapid onset of an intoxication that is
characterized by light-headedness and a floating sensation that clears in a matter of
minutes after administration is stopped. There are reports of temporary but clinically
relevant confusion and reversible paranoid states when nitrous oxide is used regularly.
Other substances that are capable of producing mild intoxications include catnip,
which can produce states similar to those observed with marijuana and which in high
doses is reported to result in LSD-type perceptions; betel nut, which is chewed in many
cultures to produce a mild euphoria and floating sensation; and kava (a substance
derived from the South Pacific pepper plant), which produces sedation, incoordination,
weight loss, mild forms of hepatitis, and lung abnormalities. In addition, individuals can
develop dependence and impairment through repeated self-administration of over-the-
counter and prescription drugs, including cortisol, antiparkinsonian agents that
have anticholinergic properties, and antihistamines. A discussion of how to code
medication-related disorders is found on p. 188.
Texts and criteria sets have already been provided to define the generic aspects of
Substance Dependence (p. 176), Substance Abuse (p. 182), Substance Intoxication
(p. 183), and Substance Withdrawal (p. 184) that are applicable across classes of
substances. The Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Disorders are described in the
sections of the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (e.g., Other
(or Unknown) Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is included in the "Mood Disorders"
section). Listed below are the Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorders and the
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Disorders.
Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorders
304.90
305.90
Other (or Unknown) Substance Dependence (see p. 176)
Other (or Unknown) Substance Abuse (see p. 182)
Other (or Unknown) Substance—Induced Disorders
292.89
Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication (see p. 183)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
292.0
Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal (see p. 184)
Specify if With Perceptual Disturbances
292.81 Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Delirium (see p. 129)
292.82 Other (or Unknown) Substance—Induced Persisting Dementia
(see p. 152)
292.83 Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic
Disorder (see p. l6l)
292.11 Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder,
With Delusions (see p. 310) Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/
With Onset During Withdrawal
292.12 Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder,
With Hallucinations (see p. 310)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
292.84 Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (see p. 370)
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal272
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.9
Substance-Related Disorders
Other (or Unknown) Substance—Induced Anxiety Disorder (see p. 439)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Other (or Unknown) Substance—Induced Sexual Dysfunction
(see p. 519) Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder (see p. 601)
Specify if: With Onset During Intoxication/With Onset During Withdrawal
Other (or Unknown) Substance—Related Disorder
Not Otherwise SpecifiedSchizophrenia and
Other Psychotic Disorders
T
he disorders included in this section are all characterized by having psychotic
symptoms as the defining feature. Other disorders that may present with psychotic
symptoms (but not as defining features) are included elsewhere in the manual (e.g.,
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type and Substance-Induced Delirium in the "Delirium,
Dementia, and Amnestic and Other Cognitive Disorders" section; Major Depressive
Disorder, With Psychotic Features, in the "Mood Disorders" section).
The term psychotic has historically received a number of different definitions, none
of which has achieved universal acceptance. The narrowest definition of psychotic is
restricted to delusions or prominent hallucinations, with the hallucinations occurring in
the absence of insight into their pathological nature. A slightly less restrictive definition
would also include prominent hallucinations that the individual realizes are hallucinatory
experiences. Broader still is a definition that also includes other positive symptoms of
Schizophrenia (i.e., disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior).
Unlike these definitions based on symptoms, the definition used in earlier classifications
(e.g., DSM-II and ICD-9) was probably far too inclusive and focused on the severity of
functional impairment, so that a mental disorder was termed "psychotic" if it resulted in
"impairment that grossly interferes with the capacity to meet ordinary demands of life."
Finally, the term has been defined conceptually as a loss of ego boundaries or a gross
impairment in reality testing. The different disorders in this section emphasize different
aspects of the various definitions of psychotic. In Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform
Disorder, Schizoaffective Disorder, and Brief Psychotic Disorder, the term psychotic refers
to delusions, any prominent hallucinations, disorganized speech, or disorganized or
catatonic behavior. In Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition and in
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, psychotic refers to delusions or only those
hallucinations that are not accompanied by insight. Finally, in Delusional Disorder and
Shared Psychotic Disorder, psychotic is equivalent to delusional.
The following disorders are included in this section:
Schizophrenia is a disturbance that lasts for at least 6 months and includes at least
1 month of active-phase symptoms (i.e., two [or more] of the following: delusions,
hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, negative
symptoms). Definitions for the Schizophrenia subtypes (Paranoid, Disorganized, Cata-
tonic, Undifferentiated, and Residual) are also included in this section.
Schizophreniform Disorder is characterized by a symptomatic presentation that
273274
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
is equivalent to Schizophrenia except for its duration (i.e., the disturbance lasts from
1 to 6 months) and the absence of a requirement that there be a decline in functioning.
Schizoaffective Disorder is a disturbance in which a mood episode and the
active-phase symptoms of Schizophrenia occur together and were preceded or are
followed by at least 2 weeks of delusions or hallucinations without prominent mood
symptoms.
Delusional Disorder is characterized by at least 1 month of nonbizarre delusions
without other active-phase symptoms of Schizophrenia.
Brief Psychotic Disorder is a psychotic disturbance that lasts more than 1 day and
remits by 1 month.
Shared Psychotic Disorder is a disturbance that develops in an individual who is
influenced by someone else who has an established delusion with similar content.
In Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, the psychotic
symptoms are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a general medical
condition.
In Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, the psychotic symptoms are judged
to be a direct physiological consequence of a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin
exposure.
Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for classifying psychotic
presentations that do not meet the criteria for any of the specific Psychotic Disorders
defined in this section or psychotic symptomatology about which there is inadequate or
contradictory information.
Schizophrenia
The essential features of Schizophrenia are a mixture of characteristic signs and
symptoms (both positive and negative) that have been present for a significant portion
of time during a 1-month period (or for a shorter time if successfully treated), with some
signs of the disorder persisting for at least 6 months (Criteria A and C). These signs and
symptoms are associated with marked social or occupational dysfunction (Criterion B).
The disturbance is not better accounted for by Schizoaffective Disorder or a Mood
Disorder With Psychotic Features and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance or a general medical condition (Criteria D and E). In individuals with a previous
diagnosis of Autistic Disorder (or another Pervasive Developmental Disorder), the
additional diagnosis of Schizophrenia is warranted only if prominent delusions or
hallucinations are present for at least a month (Criterion F). The characteristic symptoms
of Schizophrenia involve a range of cognitive and emotional dysfunctions that include
perception, inferential thinking, language and communication, behavioral monitoring,
affect, fluency and productivity of thought and speech, hedonic capacity, volition and
drive, and attention. No single symptom is pathognomonic of Schizophrenia; the
diagnosis involves the recognition of a constellation of signs and symptoms associated
with impaired occupational or social functioning.
Characteristic symptoms (Criterion A) may be conceptualized as falling into two
broad categories—positive and negative. The positive symptoms appear to reflect an
excess or distortion of normal functions, whereas the negative symptoms appear to
reflect a diminution or loss of normal functions. The positive symptoms (Criteria A1-A4)
include distortions or exaggerations of inferential thinking (delusions), perceptionSchizophrenia
275
(hallucinations), language and communication (disorganized speech), and behavioral
monitoring (grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior). These positive symptoms may
comprise two distinct dimensions, which may in turn be related to different underlying
neural mechanisms and clinical correlations: the "psychotic dimension" includes delu-
sions and hallucinations, whereas the "disorganization dimension" includes disorga-
nized speech and behavior. Negative symptoms (Criterion A5) include restrictions in the
range and intensity of emotional expression (affective flattening), in the fluency and
productivity of thought and speech (alogia), and in the initiation of goal-directed
behavior (avolition).
Delusions (Criterion Al) are erroneous beliefs that usually involve a misinterpreta-
tion of perceptions or experiences. Their content may include a variety of themes (e.g.,
persecutory, referential, somatic, religious, or grandiose). Persecutory delusions are most
common; the person believes he or she is being tormented, followed, tricked, spied on,
or subjected to ridicule. Referential delusions are also common; the person believes that
certain gestures, comments, passages from books, newspapers, song lyrics, or other
environmental cues are specifically directed at him or her. The distinction between a
delusion and a strongly held idea is sometimes difficult to make and depends on the
degree of conviction with which the belief is held despite clear contradictory evidence.
Although bizarre delusions are considered to be especially characteristic of Schizo-
phrenia, "bizarreness" may be difficult to judge, especially across different cultures.
Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible and not understandable
and do not derive from ordinary life experiences. An example of a bizarre delusion is
a person's belief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs and has replaced
them with someone else's organs without leaving any wounds or scars. An example of
a nonbizarre delusion is a person's false belief that he or she is under surveillance by
the police. Delusions that express a loss of control over mind or body (i.e., those included
among Schneider's list of "first-rank symptoms") are generally considered to be bizarre;
these include a person's belief that his or her thoughts have been taken away by some
outside force ("thought withdrawal"), that alien thoughts have been put into his or her
mind ("thought insertion"), or that his or her body or actions are being acted on or
manipulated by some outside force ("delusions of control"). If the delusions are judged
to be bizarre, only this single symptom is needed to satisfy Criterion A for Schizophrenia.
Hallucinations (Criterion A2) may occur in any sensory modality (e.g., auditory,
visual, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile), but auditory hallucinations are by far the most
common and characteristic of Schizophrenia. Auditory hallucinations are usually expe-
rienced as voices, whether familiar or unfamiliar, that are perceived as distinct from the
person's own thoughts. The content may be quite variable, although pejorative or
threatening voices are especially common. Certain types of auditory hallucinations (i.e.,
two or more voices conversing with one another or voices maintaining a running
commentary on the person's thoughts or behavior) have been considered to be
particularly characteristic of Schizophrenia and were included among Schneider's list of
first-rank symptoms. If these types of hallucinations are present, then only this single
symptom is needed to satisfy Criterion A. The hallucinations must occur in the context
of a clear sensorium; those that occur while falling asleep (hypnagogic) or waking up
(hypnopompic) are considered to be within the range of normal experience. Isolated
experiences of hearing one's name called or experiences that lack the quality of an
external percept (e.g., a humming in one's head) are also not considered to be
hallucinations characteristic of Schizophrenia. Hallucinations may also be a normal part
of religious experience in certain cultural contexts.276
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
Disorganized thinking ("formal thought disorder," "loosening of associations") has
been argued by some (Bleuler, in particular) to be the single most important feature of
Schizophrenia. Because of the difficulty inherent in developing an objective definition
of "thought disorder," and because in a clinical setting inferences about thought are
based primarily on the individual's speech, the concept of disorganized speech (Criterion
A3) has been emphasized in the definition for Schizophrenia used in this manual. The
speech of individuals with Schizophrenia may be disorganized in a variety of ways. The
person may "slip off the track" from one topic to another ("derailment" or "loose
associations"); answers to questions may be obliquely related or completely unrelated
("tangentiality"); and, rarely, speech may be so severely disorganized that it is nearly
incomprehensible and resembles receptive aphasia in its linguistic disorganization
("incoherence" or "word salad"). Because mildly disorganized speech is common and
nonspecific, the symptom must be severe enough to substantially impair effective
communication. Less severe disorganized thinking or speech may occur during the
prodromal and residual periods of Schizophrenia (see Criterion C).
Grossly disorganized behavior (Criterion A4) may manifest itself in a variety of ways,
ranging from childlike silliness to unpredictable agitation. Problems may be noted in
any form of goal-directed behavior, leading to difficulties in performing activities of daily
living such as organizing meals or maintaining hygiene. The person may appear
markedly disheveled, may dress in an unusual manner (e.g., wearing multiple overcoats,
scarves, and gloves on a hot day), or may display clearly inappropriate sexual behavior
(e.g., public masturbation) or unpredictable and untriggered agitation (e.g., shouting or
swearing). Care should be taken not to apply this criterion too broadly. Grossly
disorganized behavior must be distinguished from behavior that is merely aimless or
generally unpurposeful and from organized behavior that is motivated by delusional
beliefs. Similarly, a few instances of restless, angry, or agitated behavior should not be
considered to be evidence of Schizophrenia, especially if the motivation is understandable.
Catatonic motor behaviors (Criterion A4) include a marked decrease in reactivity to
the environment, sometimes reaching an extreme degree of complete unawareness
(catatonic stupor), maintaining a rigid posture and resisting efforts to be moved (catatonic
rigidity), active resistance to instructions or attempts to be moved (catatonic negativism)
the assumption of inappropriate or bizarre postures (catatonic posturing), or purposeless
and unstimulated excessive motor activity (catatonic excitement). Although catatonia
has historically been associated with Schizophrenia, the clinician should keep in mind
that catatonic symptoms are nonspecific and may occur in other mental disorders (see
Mood Disorders With Catatonic Features, p. 382), in general medical conditions (see
Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, p. 169), and Medication-Induced
Movement Disorders (see Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism, p. 736).
The negative symptoms of Schizophrenia (Criterion A5) account for a substantial
degree of the morbidity associated with the disorder. Three negative symptoms—
affective flattening, alogia, and avolition—are included in the definition of Schizophrenia;
other negative symptoms (e.g., anhedonia) are noted in the "Associated Features and
Disorders" section below. Affective flattening is especially common and is characterized
by the person's face appearing immobile and unresponsive, with poor eye contact and
reduced body language. Although a person with affective flattening may smile and warm
up occasionally, his or her range of emotional expressiveness is clearly diminished most
of the time. It may be useful to observe the person interacting with peers to determine
whether affective flattening is sufficiently persistent to meet the criterion. Alogia (poverty
of speech) is manifested by brief, laconic, empty replies. The individual with alogiaSchizophrenia
277
appears to have a diminution of thoughts that is reflected in decreased fluency and
productivity of speech. This must be differentiated from an unwillingness to speak, a
clinical judgment that may require observation over time and in a variety of situations.
Avolition is characterized by an inability to initiate and persist in goal-directed activities.
The person may sit for long periods of time and show little interest in participating in
work or social activities.
Although quite ubiquitous in Schizophrenia, negative symptoms are difficult to
evaluate because they occur on a continuum with normality, are nonspecific, and may
be due to a variety of other factors (e.g., as a consequence of positive symptoms,
medication side effects, a Mood Disorder, environmental understimulation, or demoral-
ization). Social isolation or impoverished speech may not be best conceived of as
negative symptoms if they occur as a consequence of a positive symptom (e.g., a
paranoid delusion or a prominent hallucination). For example, the behavior of an
individual who has the delusional belief that he will be in danger if he leaves his room
or talks to anyone may mimic alogia and avolition. Neuroleptic medications often
produce extrapyramidal side effects that closely resemble affective flattening or avolition.
The distinction between true negative symptoms and medication side effects depends
on clinical judgment concerning the severity of negative symptoms, the nature and type
of neuroleptic medication, the effects of dosage adjustment, and the effects of anticho-
linergic medications. The difficult distinction between negative symptoms and depressive
symptoms may be informed by the other accompanying symptoms that are present and
the fact that individuals with symptoms of depression typically experience an intense
painful affect, whereas those with Schizophrenia have a diminution or emptiness of
affect. Finally, chronic environmental understimulation or demoralization may result in
learned apathy and avolition. In establishing the presence of negative symptoms,
perhaps the best test is their persistence for a considerable period of time despite efforts
directed at resolving each of the potential causes described above. It has been suggested
that enduring negative symptoms be referred to as "deficit" symptoms.
Criterion A for Schizophrenia requires that at least two of the five items be present
concurrently for much of at least 1 month. However, if delusions are bizarre or
hallucinations involve "voices commenting" or "voices conversing," then the presence
of only one item is required. The presence of this relatively severe constellation of signs
and symptoms is referred to as the "active phase." In those situations in which the
active-phase symptoms remit within a month in response to treatment, Criterion A can
still be considered to have been met if the clinician judges that the symptoms would
have persisted for a month in the absence of effective treatment. In children, evaluation
of the characteristic symptoms should include due consideration of the presence of other
disorders or developmental difficulties. For example, the disorganized speech in a child
with a Communication Disorder should not count toward a diagnosis of Schizophrenia
unless the degree of disorganization is significantly greater than would be expected on
the basis of the Communication Disorder alone.
Schizophrenia involves dysfunction in one or more major areas of functioning (e.g.,
interpersonal relations, work or education, or self-care) (Criterion B). Typically, func-
tioning is clearly below that which had been achieved before the onset of symptoms. If
the disturbance begins in childhood or adolescence, however, there may be a failure to
achieve what would have been expected for the individual rather than a deterioration
in functioning. Comparing the individual with unaffected siblings may be helpful in
making this determination. Educational progress is frequently disrupted, and the
individual may be unable to finish school. Many individuals are unable to hold a job for278
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
sustained periods of time and are employed at a lower level than their parents
("downward drift"). The majority (60%-70%) of individuals with Schizophrenia do not
marry, and most have relatively limited social contacts. The dysfunction persists for a
substantial period during the course of the disorder and does not appear to be a direct
result of any single feature. For example, if a woman quits her job because of the
circumscribed delusion that her boss is trying to kill her, this alone is not sufficient
evidence for this criterion unless there is a more pervasive pattern of difficulties (usually
in multiple domains of functioning).
Some signs of the disturbance must persist for a continuous period of at least
6 months (Criterion C). During that time period, there must be at least 1 month of
symptoms (or less than 1 month if symptoms are successfully treated) that meet
Criterion A of Schizophrenia (the active phase). Prodromal symptoms are often present
prior to the active phase, and residual symptoms may follow it. Some prodromal and
residual symptoms are relatively mild or subthreshold forms of the positive symptoms
specified in Criterion A. Individuals may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs that
are not of delusional proportions (e.g., ideas of reference or magical thinking); they may
have unusual perceptual experiences (e.g., sensing the presence of an unseen person
or force in the absence of formed hallucinations); their speech may be generally
understandable but digressive, vague, or overly abstract or concrete; and their behavior
may be peculiar but not grossly disorganized (e.g., mumbling to themselves, collecting
odd and apparently worthless objects). In addition to these positive-like symptoms,
negative symptoms are particularly common in the prodromal and residual phases and
can often be quite severe. Individuals who had been socially active may become
withdrawn; they lose interest in previously pleasurable activities; they may become less
talkative and inquisitive; and they may spend the bulk of their time in bed. Such negative
symptoms are often the first sign to the family that something is wrong; family members
may ultimately report that they experienced the individual as "gradually slipping away."
Subtypes and Course Specifiers
The diagnosis of a particular subtype is based on the clinical picture that occasioned the
most recent evaluation or admission to clinical care and may therefore change over time.
Separate text and criteria are provided for each of the following subtypes:
295.30 Paranoid Type (see p. 287)
295.10 Disorganized Type (see p. 287)
295.20 Catatonic Type (see p. 288)
295.90 Undifferentiated Type (see p. 289)
295.60 Residual Type (see p. 289)
The following specifiers may be used to indicate the characteristic course of
symptoms of Schizophrenia over time. These specifiers can be applied only after at least
1 year has elapsed since the initial onset of active-phase symptoms. During this initial
1-year period, no course specifiers can be given.
Episodic With Interepisode Residual Symptoms. This specifier applies when
the course is characterized by episodes in which Criterion A for Schizophrenia is
met and there are clinically significant residual symptoms between the episodes.
With Prominent Negative Symptoms can be added if prominent negative
symptoms are present during these residual periods.Schizophrenia
279
Episodic With No Interepisode Residual Symptoms. This specifier applies
when the course is characterized by episodes in which Criterion A for Schizo-
phrenia is met and there are no clinically significant residual symptoms between
the episodes.
Continuous. This specifier applies when characteristic symptoms of Criterion
A are met throughout all (or most) of the course. With Prominent Negative
Symptoms can be added if prominent negative symptoms are also present.
Single Episode In Partial Remission. This specifier applies when there has
been a single episode in which Criterion A for Schizophrenia is met and some
clinically significant residual symptoms remain. With Prominent Negative
Symptoms can be added if these residual symptoms include prominent negative
symptoms.
Single Episode In Full Remission. This specifier applies when there has been
a single episode in which Criterion A for Schizophrenia has been met and no
clinically significant residual symptoms remain.
Other or Unspecified Pattern. This specifier is used if another or an unspec-
ified course pattern has been present.
Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for Schizophrenia is selected based on the appropriate subtype:
295.30 for Paranoid Type, 295.10 for Disorganized Type, 295.20 for Catatonic Type,
295.90 for Undifferentiated Type, and 295.60 for Residual Type. There are no fifth-digit
codes available for the course specifiers. In recording the name of the disorder, the
course specifiers are noted after the appropriate subtype (e.g., 295.30 Schizophrenia,
Paranoid Type, Episodic With Interepisode Residual Symptoms, With Prominent Nega-
tive Symptoms).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders.
The individual with
Schizophrenia may display inappropriate affect (e.g., smiling, laughing, or a silly facial
expression in the absence of an appropriate stimulus), which is one of the defining
features of the Disorganized Type. Anhedonia is common and is manifested by a loss
of interest or pleasure. Dysphoric mood may take the form of depression, anxiety, or
anger. There may be disturbances in sleep pattern (e.g., sleeping during the day and
nighttime activity or restlessness). The individual may show a lack of interest in eating
or may refuse food as a consequence of delusional beliefs. Often there are abnormalities
of psychomotor activity (e.g., pacing, rocking, or apathetic immobility). Difficulty
concentrating is frequently evident and may reflect problems with focusing attention or
distractibility due to preoccupation with internal stimuli. Although basic intellectual
functions are classically considered to be intact in Schizophrenia, some indications of
cognitive dysfunction are often present. The individual may be confused or disoriented
or may have memory impairment during a period of exacerbation of active symptoms
or in the presence of very severe negative symptoms. Lack of insight is common and
may be one of the best predictors of poor outcome, perhaps because it predisposes the
individual to noncompliance with treatment. Depersonalization, derealization, and
somatic concerns may occur and sometimes reach delusional proportions. Motor280
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
abnormalities (e.g., grimacing, posturing, odd mannerisms, ritualistic or stereotyped
behavior) are sometimes present. The life expectancy of individuals with Schizophrenia
is shorter than that of the general population for a variety of reasons. Suicide is an
important factor, because approximately 10% of individuals with Schizophrenia commit
suicide. Risk factors for suicide include being male, age under 30 years, depressive
symptoms, unemployment, and recent hospital discharge. There is conflicting evidence
with regard to whether the frequency of violent acts is greater than in the general
population. Comorbidity with Substance-Related Disorders (including Nicotine Depen-
dence) is common. Schizotypal, Schizoid, or Paranoid Personality Disorder may some-
times precede the onset of Schizophrenia. Whether these Personality Disorders are
simply prodromal to Schizophrenia or whether they constitute a separate earlier disorder
is not clear.
Associated laboratory findings. No laboratory findings have been identified that
are diagnostic of Schizophrenia. However, a variety of laboratory findings have been
noted to be abnormal in groups of individuals with Schizophrenia relative to control
subjects. Structural abnormalities in the brain have consistently been demonstrated in
individuals with Schizophrenia as a group; the most common structural abnormalities
include enlargement of the ventricular system and prominent sulci in the cortex. A variety
of other abnormalities have also been noted using structural imaging techniques (e.g.,
decreased temporal and hippocampal size, increased size of the basal ganglia, decreased
cerebral size). Functional imaging techniques have indicated that some individuals may
have abnormal cerebral blood flow or glucose utilization in specific brain regions (e.g.,
prefrontal cortex). Neuropsychological assessments may show a broad range of dysfunc-
tions (e.g., difficulty in changing response set, focusing attention, formulating abstract
concepts). Neurophysiological findings include a slowing in reaction times, abnormalitie
in eye tracking, or impairments in sensory gating. Abnormal laboratory findings may
also be noted as either a complication of Schizophrenia or of its treatment. Some
individuals with Schizophrenia drink excessive amounts of fluid ("water intoxication")
and develop abnormalities in urine specific gravity or electrolyte imbalances. Elevated
creatine phosphokinase (CPK) may result from Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (see
p. 739).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Individuals with Schizophrenia are sometimes physically awkward and may display
neurological "soft signs," such as left/right confusion, poor coordination, or mirroring.
Some minor physical anomalies (e.g., highly arched palate, narrow- or wide-set eyes or
subtle malformations of the ears) may be more common among individuals with
Schizophrenia. Perhaps the most common associated physical findings are motor
abnormalities. Most of these are likely to be related to side effects from treatment with
antipsychotic medications. Motor abnormalities that are secondary to neuroleptic
treatment include Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia (see p. 747), Neuroleptic-
Induced Parkinsonism (see p. 736), Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia (see p. 744),
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia (see p. 742), and Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
(see p. 739). Spontaneous motor abnormalities resembling those that may be induced
by neuroleptics (e.g., sniffing, tongue clucking, grunting) had been described in the
preneuroleptic era and are also still observed, although they may be difficult to
distinguish from neuroleptic effects. Other physical findings may be related to frequently
associated disorders. For example, because Nicotine Dependence is so common inSchizophrenia
281
Schizophrenia, these individuals are more likely to develop cigarette-related pathology
(e.g., emphysema and other pulmonary and cardiac problems).
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Clinicians assessing the symptoms of Schizophrenia in socioeconomic or cultural
situations that are different from their own must take cultural differences into account.
Ideas that may appear to be delusional in one culture (e.g., sorcery and witchcraft) may
be commonly held in another. In some cultures, visual or auditory hallucinations with
a religious content may be a normal part of religious experience (e.g., seeing the Virgin
Mary or hearing God's voice). In addition, the assessment of disorganized speech may
be made difficult by linguistic variation in narrative styles across cultures that affects the
logical form of verbal presentation. The assessment of affect requires sensitivity to
differences in styles of emotional expression, eye contact, and body language, which
vary across cultures. If the assessment is conducted in a language that is different from
the individual's primary language, care must be taken to ensure that alogia is not related
to linguistic barriers. Because the cultural meaning of self-initiated, goal-directed activity
can be expected to vary across diverse settings, disturbances of volition must also be
carefully assessed. There is some evidence that clinicians may have a tendency to
overdiagnose Schizophrenia (instead of Bipolar Disorder) in some ethnic groups.
Cultural differences have been noted in the presentation, course, and outcome of
Schizophrenia. Catatonic behavior has been reported as relatively uncommon among
individuals with Schizophrenia in the United States but is more common in non-Western
countries. Individuals with Schizophrenia in developing nations tend to have a more
acute course and a better outcome than do individuals in industrialized nations.
The onset of Schizophrenia typically occurs between the late teens and the mid-30s,
with onset prior to adolescence rare (although cases with age at onset of 5 or 6 years
have been reported). The essential features of the condition are the same in children,
but it may be particularly difficult to make the diagnosis in this age group. In children,
delusions and hallucinations may be less elaborated than those observed in adults, and
visual hallucinations may be more common. Disorganized speech is observed in a
number of disorders with childhood onset (e.g., Communication Disorders, Pervasive
Developmental Disorders), as is disorganized behavior (e.g., Attention-Deficit/Hyperac-
tivity Disorder, Stereotypic Movement Disorder). These symptoms should not be
attributed to Schizophrenia without due consideration of these more common disorders
of childhood. Schizophrenia can also begin later in life (e.g., after age 45 years).
Late-onset cases tend to be similar to earlier-onset Schizophrenia, except for a higher
ratio of women, a better occupational history, and a greater frequency of having been
married. The clinical presentation is more likely to include paranoid delusions and
hallucinations, and less likely to include disorganized and negative symptoms. The
course is usually chronic, although individuals are often quite responsive to antipsychotic
medications in lower doses. Among those with the oldest age at onset (i.e., over age
60 years), sensory deficits (e.g., hearing loss) apparently occur more commonly than in
the general adult population. Their specific role in pathogenesis remains unknown.
There are gender differences in the presentation and course of Schizophrenia.
Women are more likely to have a later onset, more prominent mood symptoms, and a
better prognosis. Although it has long been held that males and females are affected in
roughly equal numbers, estimates of sex ratio are confounded by issues of ascertainment282
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
and definition. Hospital-based studies suggest a higher rate of Schizophrenia in males,
whereas community-based surveys have mostly suggested an equal sex ratio. Broader
definitions of Schizophrenia with respect to the boundary with Mood Disorders will yield
a higher female-to-male ratio than the relatively narrow construct of Schizophrenia used
in this manual.
Prevalence
There is variability in the reported prevalence of Schizophrenia because different studies
have used different methods of ascertainment (e.g., rural versus urban, community versus
clinic or hospital) and different definitions of Schizophrenia (narrow versus broad,
criterion-based versus clinical). Estimates of prevalence have ranged from 0.2% to 2.0%
across many large studies. Prevalence rates are similar throughout the world, but pockets
of high prevalence have been reported in some specific areas. Taking all these sources
of information into account, the lifetime prevalence of Schizophrenia is usually estimated
to be between 0.5% and 1%. Because Schizophrenia tends to be chronic, incidence rate
are considerably lower than prevalence rates and are estimated to be approximately
1 per 10,000 per year.
Course
The median age at onset for the first psychotic episode of Schizophrenia is in the early
to mid-20s for men and in the late 20s for women. The onset may be abrupt or insidious,
but the majority of individuals display some type of prodromal phase manifested by the
slow and gradual development of a variety of signs and symptoms (e.g., social
withdrawal, loss of interest in school or work, deterioration in hygiene and grooming,
unusual behavior, outbursts of anger). Family members may find this behavior difficult
to interpret and assume that the person is "going through a phase." Eventually, however,
the appearance of some active-phase symptom marks the disturbance as Schizophrenia.
The age at onset may have both pathophysiological and prognostic significance.
Individuals with an early age at onset are more often male and have a poorer premorbid
adjustment, lower educational achievement, more evidence of structural brain abnor-
malities, more prominent negative signs and symptoms, more evidence of cognitive
impairment as assessed with neuropsychological testing, and a worse outcome. Con-
versely, individuals with a later onset are more often female, have less evidence of
structural brain abnormalities or cognitive impairment, and display a better outcome.
Most studies of course and outcome in Schizophrenia suggest that the course may
be variable, with some individuals displaying exacerbations and remissions, whereas
others remain chronically ill. Because of variability in definition and ascertainment, an
accurate summary of the long-term outcome of Schizophrenia is not possible. Complete
remission (i.e., a return to full premorbid functioning) is probably not common in this
disorder. Of those who remain ill, some appear to have a relatively stable course, whereas
others show a progressive worsening associated with severe disability. Early in the illness,
negative symptoms may be prominent, appearing primarily as prodromal features.
Subsequently, positive symptoms appear. Because these positive symptoms are partic-
ularly responsive to treatment, they typically diminish, but in many individuals, negative
symptoms persist between episodes of positive symptoms. There is some suggestion
that negative symptoms may become steadily more prominent in some individuals duringSchizophrenia
283
the course of the illness. Numerous studies have indicated a group of factors that are
associated with a better prognosis. These include good premorbid adjustment, acute
onset, later age at onset, being female, precipitating events, associated mood disturbance,
brief duration of active-phase symptoms, good interepisode functioning, minimal
residual symptoms, absence of structural brain abnormalities, normal neurological
functioning, a family history of Mood Disorder, and no family history of Schizophrenia.
Familial Pattern
The first-degree biological relatives of individuals with Schizophrenia have a risk for
Schizophrenia that is about 10 times greater than that of the general population.
Concordance rates for Schizophrenia are higher in monozygotic twins than in dizygotic
twins. Adoption studies have shown that biological relatives of individuals with
Schizophrenia have a substantially increased risk for Schizophrenia, whereas adoptive
relatives have no increased risk. Although much evidence suggests the importance of
genetic factors in the etiology of Schizophrenia, the existence of a substantial discordance
rate in monozygotic twins also indicates the importance of environmental factors.
Differential Diagnosis
A wide variety of general medical conditions can present with psychotic symptoms.
Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, delirium, or dementia
is diagnosed when there is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
tests that indicates that the delusions or hallucinations are the direct physiological
consequence of a general medical condition (e.g., Cushing's syndrome, brain tumor)
(see p. 306). Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, Substance-Induced Delirium
and Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia are distinguished from Schizophrenia
by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin)
is judged to be etiologically related to the delusions or hallucinations (see p. 310). Man
different types of Substance-Related Disorders may produce symptoms similar to
those of Schizophrenia (e.g., sustained amphetamine or cocaine use may produce
delusions or hallucinations; phencyclidine use may produce a mixture of positive and
negative symptoms). Based on a variety of features that characterize the course of
Schizophrenia and Substance-Related Disorders, the clinician must determine whether
the psychotic symptoms have been initiated and maintained by the substance use.
Ideally, the clinician should attempt to observe the individual during a sustained period
(e.g., 4 weeks) of abstinence. However, because such prolonged periods of abstinence
are often difficult to achieve, the clinician may need to consider other evidence, such
as whether the psychotic symptoms appear to be exacerbated by the substance and to
diminish when it has been discontinued, the relative severity of psychotic symptoms in
relation to the amount and duration of substance use, and knowledge of the characteristic
symptoms produced by a particular substance (e.g., amphetamines typically produce
delusions and stereotypies, but not affective blunting or prominent negative symptoms).
Distinguishing Schizophrenia from Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features an
SchizoaffectiveDisorder is made difficult by the fact that mood disturbance is common
during the prodromal, active, and residual phases of Schizophrenia. If psychotic
symptoms occur exclusively during periods of mood disturbance, the diagnosis is Mood
Disorder With Psychotic Features. In Schizoaffective Disorder, there must be a mood284
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
episode that is concurrent with the active-phase symptoms of Schizophrenia, mood
symptoms must be present for a substantial portion of the total duration of the
disturbance, and delusions or hallucinations must be present for at least 2 weeks in the
absence of prominent mood symptoms. In contrast, mood symptoms in Schizophrenia
either have a duration that is brief in relation to the total duration of the disturbance,
occur only during the prodromal or residual phases, or do not meet full criteria for a
mood episode. When mood symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode are
superimposed on Schizophrenia and are of particular clinical significance, an additional
diagnosis of Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified or Bipolar Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified may be given. Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type, may be difficult to
distinguish from a Mood Disorder With Catatonic Features.
By definition, Schizophrenia differs from Schizophreniform Disorder on the basis
of duration. Schizophrenia involves the presence of symptoms (including prodromal or
residual symptoms) for at least 6 months, whereas the total duration of symptoms in
Schizophreniform Disorder must be at least 1 month but less than 6 months.
Schizophreniform Disorder also does not require a decline in functioning. Brief
Psychotic Disorder is defined by the presence of delusions, hallucinations, disorga-
nized speech, or grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior lasting for at least 1 day but
for less than 1 month.
The differential diagnosis between Schizophrenia and Delusional Disorder rests
on the nature of the delusions (nonbizarre in Delusional Disorder) and the absence of
other characteristic symptoms of Schizophrenia (e.g., hallucinations, disorganized
speech or behavior, or prominent negative symptoms). Delusional Disorder is particu-
larly difficult to differentiate from the Paranoid Type of Schizophrenia, because this
subtype does not include prominent disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, or flat
or inappropriate affect and is often associated with less decline in functioning than is
characteristic of the other subtypes of Schizophrenia. When poor psychosocial function-
ing is present in Delusional Disorder, it arises directly from the delusional beliefs
themselves.
A diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified may be made if
insufficient information is available to choose between Schizophrenia and other Psy-
chotic Disorders (e.g., Schizoaffective Disorder) or to determine whether the presenting
symptoms are substance induced or are the result of a general medical condition. Such
uncertainty is particularly likely to occur early in the course of the disorder.
Although Schizophrenia and Pervasive Developmental Disorders (e.g., Autistic
Disorder) share disturbances in language, affect, and interpersonal relatedness, they can
be distinguished in a number of ways. Pervasive Developmental Disorders are charac-
teristically recognized during infancy or early childhood (usually before age 3 years),
whereas such early onset is rare in Schizophrenia. Moreover, in Pervasive Developmental
Disorders, there is an absence of prominent delusions and hallucinations; more
pronounced abnormalities in affect; and speech that is absent or minimal and charac-
terized by stereotypies and abnormalities in prosody. Schizophrenia may occasionally
develop in individuals with a Pervasive Developmental Disorder; a diagnosis of
Schizophrenia is warranted in individuals with a preexisting diagnosis of Autistic Disorder
or another Pervasive Developmental Disorder only if prominent hallucinations or
delusions have been present for at least a month. Childhood-onset Schizophrenia must
be distinguished from childhood presentations combining disorganized speech
(from a Communication Disorder) and disorganized behavior (from Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder).Schizophrenia
285
Schizophrenia shares features (e.g., paranoid ideation, magical thinking, social
avoidance, and vague and digressive speech) with and may be preceded by
Schizotypal, Schizoid, or Paranoid Personality Disorder. An additional diagnosis
of Schizophrenia is appropriate when the symptoms are severe enough to satisfy
Criterion A of Schizophrenia. The preexisting Personality Disorder may be noted on Axis
II followed by "Premorbid" in parentheses [e.g., Schizotypal Personality Disorder
(Premorbid)].
• Diagnostic criteria for Schizophrenia
A. Characteristic symptoms: Two (or more) of the following, each present
for a significant portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if
successfully treated):
(1) delusions
(2) hallucinations
(3) disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence)
(4) grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior
(5) negative symptoms, i.e., affective flattening, alogia, or avolition
Note: Only one Criterion A symptom is required if delusions are bizarre or
hallucinations consist of a voice keeping up a running commentary on the
person's behavior or thoughts, or two or more voices conversing with each
other.
B. Social/occupational dysfunction: For a significant portion of the time
since the onset of the disturbance, one or more major areas of
functioning such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care are
markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset
is in childhood or adolescence, failure to achieve expected level of
interpersonal, academic, or occupational achievement).
C. Duration: Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least
6 months. This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of
symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Criterion A (i.e.,
active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or
residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the
signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms
or two or more symptoms listed in Criterion A present in an attenuated
form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
D. Schizoaffective and Mood Disorder exclusion: Schizoaffective Disorder
and Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features have been ruled out
because either (1) no Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episodes have
occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms; or (2) if mood
episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, their total
(continued)286
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Schizophrenia (continued)
duration has been brief relative to the duration of the active and residual
periods.
E. Substance/general medical condition exclusion: The disturbance is not
due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of
abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition.
F. Relationship to a Pervasive Developmental Disorder: If there is a history
of Autistic Disorder or another Pervasive Developmental Disorder, the
additional diagnosis of Schizophrenia is made only if prominent delu-
sions or hallucinations are also present for at least a month (or less if
successfully treated).
Classification of longitudinal course (can be applied only after at least 1 year has
elapsed since the initial onset of active-phase symptoms):
Episodic With Interepisode Residual Symptoms (episodes are defined
by the reemergence of prominent psychotic symptoms); also specify if
With Prominent Negative Symptoms
Episodic With No Interepisode Residual Symptoms
Continuous (prominent psychotic symptoms are present throughout the
period of observation); also specify if With Prominent Negative
Symptoms
Single Episode In Partial Remission; also specify if With Prominent
Negative Symptoms
Single Episode In Full Remission
Other or Unspecified Pattern
Schizophrenia Subtypes
The subtypes of Schizophrenia are defined by the predominant symptomatology at the
time of evaluation. Although the prognostic and treatment implications of the subtypes
are variable, the Paranoid and Disorganized Types tend to be the least and most severe,
respectively. The diagnosis of a particular subtype is based on the clinical picture that
occasioned the most recent evaluation or admission to clinical care and may therefore
change over time. Not infrequently, the presentation may include symptoms that are
characteristic of more than one subtype. The choice among subtypes depends on the
following algorithm: Catatonic Type is assigned whenever prominent catatonic symp-
toms are present (regardless of the presence of other symptoms); Disorganized Type is
assigned whenever disorganized speech and behavior and flat or inappropriate affect
are prominent (unless Catatonic Type is also present); Paranoid Type is assigned
whenever there is a preoccupation with delusions or frequent hallucinations are
prominent (unless the Catatonic or Disorganized Type is present). Undifferentiated Type
is a residual category describing presentations that include prominent active-phaseSchizophrenia
287
symptoms not meeting criteria for the Catatonic, Disorganized, or Paranoid Type; and
Residual Type is for presentations in which there is continuing evidence of the
disturbance, but the criteria for the active-phase symptoms are no longer met.
A dimensional alternative to the traditional Schizophrenia subtypes is described in
Appendix B (see p. 710). The suggested dimensions are the psychotic dimension, the
disorganized dimension, and the negative dimension.
295.30 Paranoid Type
The essential feature of the Paranoid Type of Schizophrenia is the presence of prominent
delusions or auditory hallucinations in the context of a relative preservation of cognitive
functioning and affect. Symptoms characteristic of the Disorganized and Catatonic Types
(e.g., disorganized speech, flat or inappropriate affect, catatonic or disorganized
behavior) are not prominent. Delusions are typically persecutory or grandiose, or both,
but delusions with other themes (e.g., jealousy, religiosity, or somatization) may also
occur. The delusions may be multiple, but are usually organized around a coherent
theme. Hallucinations are also typically related to the content of the delusional theme.
Associated features include anxiety, anger, aloofness, and argumentativeness. The
individual may have a superior and patronizing manner and either a stilted, formal quality
or extreme intensity in interpersonal interactions. The persecutory themes may predis-
pose the individual to suicidal behavior, and the combination of persecutory and
grandiose delusions with anger may predispose the individual to violence. Onset tends
to be later in life than the other types of Schizophrenia, and the distinguishing
characteristics may be more stable over time. These individuals usually show little or no
impairment on neuropsychological or other cognitive testing. Some evidence suggests
that the prognosis for the Paranoid Type may be considerably better than for the other
types of Schizophrenia, particularly with regard to occupational functioning and capacity
for independent living.
Diagnostic criteria for 295.30 Paranoid Type
A type of Schizophrenia in which the following criteria are met:
A. Preoccupation with one or more delusions or frequent auditory
hallucinations.
B. None of the following is prominent: disorganized speech, disorganized
or catatonic behavior, or flat or inappropriate affect.
295.10 Disorganized Type
The essential features of the Disorganized Type of Schizophrenia are disorganized
speech, disorganized behavior, and flat or inappropriate affect. The disorganized speech288
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
may be accompanied by silliness and laughter that are not closely related to the content
of the speech. The behavioral disorganization (i.e., lack of goal orientation) may lead
to severe disruption in the ability to perform activities of daily living (e.g., showering,
dressing, or preparing meals). Criteria for the Catatonic Type of Schizophrenia are not
met, and delusions or hallucinations, if present, are fragmentary and not organized into
a coherent theme. Associated features include grimacing, mannerisms, and other oddities
of behavior. Impaired performance may be noted on a variety of neuropsychological
and cognitive tests. This subtype is also usually associated with poor premorbid
personality, early and insidious onset, and a continuous course without significant
remissions. Historically, and in other classification systems, this type is termed hebephrenic.
Diagnostic criteria for 295.10 Disorganized Type
A type of Schizophrenia in which the following criteria are met:
A. All of the following are prominent:
(1) disorganized speech
(2) disorganized behavior
(3) flat or inappropriate affect
B. The criteria are not met for Catatonic Type.
295.20 Catatonic Type
The essential feature of the Catatonic Type of Schizophrenia is a marked psychomotor
disturbance that may involve motoric immobility, excessive motor activity, extreme
negativism, mutism, peculiarities of voluntary movement, echolalia, or echopraxia.
Motoric immobility may be manifested by catalepsy (waxy flexibility) or stupor. The
excessive motor activity is apparently purposeless and is not influenced by external
stimuli. There may be extreme negativism that is manifested by the maintenance of a
rigid posture against attempts to be moved or resistance to all instructions. Peculiaritie
of voluntary movement are manifested by the voluntary assumption of inappropriate or
bizarre postures or by prominent grimacing. Echolalia is the pathological, parrotlike, and
apparently senseless repetition of a word or phrase just spoken by another person.
Echopraxia is the repetitive imitation of the movements of another person. Additional
features include stereotypies, mannerisms, and automatic obedience or mimicry. During
severe catatonic stupor or excitement, the person may need careful supervision to avoid
self-harm or harming others. There are potential risks from malnutrition, exhaustion,
hyperpyrexia, or self-inflicted injury. To diagnose this subtype, the individual's presen-
tation must first meet the full criteria for Schizophrenia and not be better accounted for
by another etiology: substance induced (e.g., Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism, see
p. 736), a general medical condition (see p. 169), or a Manic or Major Depressive Episode
(see p. 382).Schizophrenia
289
Diagnostic criteria for 295.20 Catatonic Type
A type of Schizophrenia in which the clinical picture is dominated by at
least two of the following:
(1) motoric immobility as evidenced by catalepsy (including waxy
flexibility) or stupor
(2) excessive motor activity (that is apparently purposeless and not
influenced by external stimuli)
(3) extreme negativism (an apparently motiveless resistance to all
instructions or maintenance of a rigid posture against attempts to
be moved) or mutism
(4) peculiarities of voluntary movement as evidenced by posturing
(voluntary assumption of inappropriate or bizarre postures), ste-
reotyped movements, prominent mannerisms, or prominent gri-
macing
(5) echolalia or echopraxia
295.90 Undifferentiated Type
The essential feature of the Undifferentiated Type of Schizophrenia is the presence of
symptoms that meet Criterion A of Schizophrenia but that do not meet criteria for the
Paranoid, Disorganized, or Catatonic Type.
Diagnostic criteria for 295.90 Undifferentiated Type
A type of Schizophrenia in which symptoms that meet Criterion A are
present, but the criteria are not met for the Paranoid, Disorganized, or
Catatonic Type.
295.60 Residual Type
The Residual Type of Schizophrenia should be used when there has been at least one
episode of Schizophrenia, but the current clinical picture is without prominent positive
psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech or behavior).
There is continuing evidence of the disturbance as indicated by the presence of negative
symptoms (e.g., flat affect, poverty of speech, or avolition) or two or more attenuated
positive symptoms (e.g., eccentric behavior, mildly disorganized speech, or odd beliefs).
If delusions or hallucinations are present, they are not prominent and are not accompa-
nied by strong affect. The course of the Residual Type may be time limited and represent
a transition between a full-blown episode and complete remission. However, it may also
be continuously present for many years, with or without acute exacerbations.290
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for 295.60 Residual Type
A type of Schizophrenia in which the following criteria are met:
A. Absence of prominent delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech,
and grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
B. There is continuing evidence of the disturbance, as indicated by the
presence of negative symptoms or two or more symptoms listed in
Criterion A for Schizophrenia, present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd
beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
295.40 Schizophreniform Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Schizophreniform Disorder are identical to those of Schizophre-
nia (Criterion A) except for two differences: the total duration of the illness (including
prodromal, active, and residual phases) is at least 1 month but less than 6 months
(Criterion B) and impaired social or occupational functioning during some part of the
illness is not required (although it may occur). The duration requirement for
Schizophreniform Disorder is intermediate between that for Brief Psychotic Disorder (in
which symptoms last for at least 1 day but for less than 1 month) and Schizophrenia (in
which the symptoms persist for at least 6 months). The diagnosis of Schizophreniform
Disorder is made under two conditions. In the first, the diagnosis is applied without
qualification to an episode of illness of between 1 and 6 months' duration from which
the individual has already recovered. In the second instance, the diagnosis is applied
when a person who, although symptomatic, has been so for less than the 6 months
required for a diagnosis of Schizophrenia. In this case, the diagnosis of Schizophreniform
Disorder should be qualified as "Provisional" because there is no certainty that the
individual will actually recover from the disturbance within the 6-month period. If the
disturbance persists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis would be changed to Schizophrenia.
Specifiers
The following specifiers for Schizophreniform Disorder may be used to indicate the
presence or absence of features that may be associated with a better prognosis:
With Good Prognostic Features. This specifier is used if at least two of the
following features are present: onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within
4 weeks of the first noticeable change in usual behavior or functioning, confusion
or perplexity at the height of the psychotic episode, good premorbid social and
occupational functioning, and absence of blunted or flat affect.
Without Good Prognostic Features. This specifier is used if two or more of
the above features have not been present.295.40 Schizophreniform Disorder
291
Associated Features and Disorders
Also see the discussion in the "Associated Features and Disorders" section for Schizo-
phrenia, p. 279- Unlike Schizophrenia, impairment in social or occupational functioning
is not required for a diagnosis of Schizophreniform Disorder. However, most individuals
do experience dysfunction in various areas of daily functioning (e.g., work or school,
interpersonal relationships, and self-care).
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
For additional discussion of culture, age, and gender factors relevant to the diagnosis of
Schizophreniform Disorder, see the "Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features" section
for Schizophrenia (p. 281). There are suggestions that in developing countries, recover
from Psychotic Disorders may be more rapid, which would result in higher rates of
Schizophreniform Disorder than of Schizophrenia.
Prevalence
Community studies have reported a lifetime prevalence of Schizophreniform Disorder
of around 0.2%, with a 1-year prevalence of 0.1%.
Course
There is little available information on the course of Schizophreniform Disorder.
Approximately one-third of individuals with an initial diagnosis of Schizophreniform
Disorder (Provisional) recover within the 6-month period and receive Schizophreniform
Disorder as their final diagnosis. The remaining two-thirds will progress to the diagnosis
of Schizophrenia or Schizoaffective Disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Because the diagnostic criteria for Schizophrenia and Schizophreniform Disorder differ
primarily in terms of duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of
Schizophrenia (p. 283) also applies to Schizophreniform Disorder. Schizophreniform
Disorder differs from Brief Psychotic Disorder, which has a duration of less than
1 month.
Diagnostic criteria for 295.40 Schizophreniform
Disorder
A. Criteria A, D, and E of Schizophrenia are met.
B. An episode of the disorder (including prodromal, active, and residual
phases) lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. (When the
diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be
qualified as "Provisional.")
(continued)292
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
D Criteria for 295.40 Schizophreniform Disorder (continued)
Specify if:
Without Good Prognostic Features
With Good Prognostic Features: as evidenced by two (or more) of the
following:
(1) onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within 4 weeks of the first
noticeable change in usual behavior or functioning
(2) confusion or perplexity at the height of the psychotic episode
(3) good premorbid social and occupational functioning
(4) absence of blunted or flat affect
295.70 Schizoaffective Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Schizoaffective Disorder is an uninterrupted period of illness
during which, at some time, there is a Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episode
concurrent with symptoms that meet Criterion A for Schizophrenia (Criterion A). In
addition, during the same period of illness, there have been delusions or hallucinations
for at least 2 weeks in the absence of prominent mood symptoms (Criterion B). Finally,
the mood symptoms are present for a substantial portion of the total duration of the
illness (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be due to the direct physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or a general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism or
temporal lobe epilepsy) (Criterion D). To meet criteria for Schizoaffective Disorder, the
essential features must occur within a single uninterrupted period of illness. The phrase
"period of illness" as used here refers to a time period during which the individual
continues to display active or residual symptoms of psychotic illness. For some
individuals, this period of illness may last for years or even decades. A period of illness
is considered to have ended when the individual has completely recovered for a
significant interval of time and no longer demonstrates any significant symptoms of the
disorder.
The phase of the illness with concurrent mood and psychotic symptoms is
characterized by the full criteria being met for both the active phase of Schizophrenia
(i.e., Criterion A) (see p. 274) and for a Major Depressive Episode (p. 320), a Mani
Episode (p. 328), or a Mixed Episode (p. 333). The duration of the Major Depressiv
Episode must be at least 2 weeks; the duration of the Manic or Mixed Episode must be
at least 1 week. Because the psychotic symptoms must have a total duration of at least
1 month to meet Criterion A for Schizophrenia, the minimum duration of a Schizoaffective
episode is also 1 month. An essential feature of a Major Depressive Episode is the
presence of either depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure. Because
loss of interest or pleasure is so common in nonaffective Psychotic Disorders, to meet
Criterion A for Schizoaffective Disorder the Major Depressive Episode must include
pervasive depressed mood (i.e., the presence of markedly diminished interest or pleasure
is not sufficient). The phase of the illness with psychotic symptoms alone is characterized
by delusions or hallucinations that last at least 2 weeks. Although some mood symptoms295.70 Schizoaffective Disorder
293
may be present during this phase, they are not prominent. This determination can be
difficult and may require longitudinal observation and multiple sources of information.
The symptoms of Schizoaffective Disorder may occur in a variety of temporal
patterns. The following is a typical pattern: An individual may have pronounced auditory
hallucinations and persecutory delusions for 2 months before the onset of a prominent
Major Depressive Episode. The psychotic symptoms and the full Major Depressive
Episode are then present for 3 months. Then, the person recovers completely from the
Major Depressive Episode, but the psychotic symptoms persist for another month before
they too disappear. During this period of illness, the individual's symptoms concurrently
met criteria for a Major Depressive Episode and Criterion A for Schizophrenia, and,
during this same period of illness, auditory hallucinations and delusions were present
both before and after the depressive phase. The total period of illness lasted for about
6 months, with psychotic symptoms alone present during the initial 2 months, both
depressive and psychotic symptoms present during the next 3 months, and psychotic
symptoms alone present during the last month. In this instance, the duration of the
depressive episode was not brief relative to the total duration of the psychotic
disturbance, and thus the presentation qualifies for a diagnosis of Schizoaffective
Disorder.
Criterion C for Schizoaffective Disorder specifies that mood symptoms that meet
criteria for a mood episode must be present for a substantial portion of the entire period
of illness. If the mood symptoms are present for only a relatively brief period of time,
the diagnosis is Schizophrenia, not Schizoaffective Disorder. In evaluating this criterion,
the clinician should determine the proportion of time during the continuous period of
psychotic illness (i.e., both active and residual symptoms) in which there were significant
mood symptoms accompanying the psychotic symptoms. The operationalization of what
is meant by "a substantial portion of time" requires clinical judgment. For example, an
individual with a 4-year history of active and residual symptoms of Schizophrenia
develops a superimposed Major Depressive Episode that lasts for 5 weeks during which
the psychotic symptoms persist. This presentation would not meet the criterion for "a
substantial portion of the total duration" because the symptoms that meet criteria for a
mood episode occurred for only 5 weeks out of a total of 4 years of disturbance. The
diagnosis in this example remains Schizophrenia with the additional diagnosis of
Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified to indicate the superimposed Major
Depressive Episode.
Subtypes
Two subtypes of Schizoaffective Disorder may be noted based on the mood component
of the disorder:
Bipolar Type. This subtype applies if a Manic Episode or Mixed Episode is part
of the presentation. Major Depressive Episodes may also occur.
Depressive Type. This subtype applies if only Major Depressive Episodes are
part of the presentation.
Associated Features and Disorders
There may be poor occupational functioning, a restricted range of social contact,
difficulties with self-care, and increased risk of suicide associated with Schizoaffective
Disorder. Residual and negative symptoms are usually less severe and less chronic than294
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
those seen in Schizophrenia. Individuals with Schizoaffective Disorder may be at
increased risk for later developing episodes of pure Mood Disorder (e.g., Major
Depressive or Bipolar Disorder) or of Schizophrenia or Schizophreniform Disorder.
There may be associated Alcohol and other Substance-Related Disorders. Limited clinical
evidence suggests that Schizoaffective Disorder may be preceded by Schizoid,
Schizotypal, Borderline, or Paranoid Personality Disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
For additional discussion of culture, age, and gender factors relevant to evaluating
psychotic symptoms, see the text for Schizophrenia (p. 281), and for a discussion of
such factors relevant to diagnosing Mood Disorders, see p. 341 and p. 352. Schizoaffective
Disorder, Bipolar Type, may be more common in young adults, whereas Schizoaffective
Disorder, Depressive Type, may be more common in older adults. Compared with
Schizophrenia, Schizoaffective Disorder probably occurs more often in women.
Prevalence
Detailed information is lacking, but Schizoaffective Disorder appears to be less common
than Schizophrenia.
Course
The typical age at onset of Schizoaffective Disorder is probably in early adulthood,
although onset can occur anywhere from adolescence to late in life. The prognosis for
Schizoaffective Disorder is somewhat better than the prognosis for Schizophrenia, but
considerably worse than the prognosis for Mood Disorders. Substantial occupational and
social dysfunction are not uncommon. The outcome for Schizoaffective Disorder, Bipolar
Type, may be better than that for Schizoaffective Disorder, Depressive Type.
Familial Pattern
There is substantial evidence that there is an increased risk for Schizophrenia in
first-degree biological relatives of individuals with Schizoaffective Disorder. Most studies
also show that relatives of individuals with Schizoaffective Disorder are at increased risk
for Mood Disorders.
Differential
Diagnosis
General medical conditions and substance use can present with a combination of
psychotic and mood symptoms. Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition, a delirium, or a dementia is diagnosed when there is evidence from the
history, physical examination, or laboratory tests indicating that the symptoms are the
direct physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (see p. 306).
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder and Substance-Induced Delirium are dis-
tinguished from Schizoaffective Disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of
abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the
symptoms (see p. 310).
Distinguishing Schizoaffective Disorder from Schizophrenia and from Mood Disorder295.70 Schizoaffective Disorder
295
With Psychotic Features is often difficult. In Schizoaffective Disorder, there must be a
mood episode that is concurrent with the active-phase symptoms of Schizophrenia, mood
symptoms must be present for a substantial portion of the total duration of the disturbance,
and delusions or hallucinations must be present for at least 2 weeks in the absence of
prominent mood symptoms. In contrast, mood symptoms in Schizophrenia either have
a duration that is brief relative to the total duration of the disturbance, occur only during
the prodromal or residual phases, or do not meet full criteria for a mood episode. If
psychotic symptoms occur exclusively during periods of mood disturbance, the diagnosis
is Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features. In Schizoaffective Disorder, symptoms should
not be counted toward a mood episode if they are clearly the result of symptoms of
Schizophrenia (e.g., difficulty sleeping because of disturbing auditory hallucinations,
weight loss because food is considered poisoned, difficulty concentrating because of
psychotic disorganization). Loss of interest or pleasure is common in nonaffective
Psychotic Disorders; therefore, to meet Criterion A for Schizoaffective Disorder, the Major
Depressive Episode must include pervasive depressed mood.
Because the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over
the course of the disturbance, the appropriate diagnosis for an individual episode of
illness may change from Schizoaffective Disorder to Schizophrenia (e.g., a diagnosis of
Schizoaffective Disorder for a severe and prominent Major Depressive Episode lasting
3 months during the first 6 months of a chronic psychotic illness would be changed to
Schizophrenia if active psychotic or prominent residual symptoms persist over several
years without a recurrence of another mood episode). The diagnosis may also change
for different episodes of illness separated by a period of recovery. For example, an
individual may have an episode of psychotic symptoms that meet Criterion A for
Schizophrenia during a Major Depressive Episode, recover fully from this episode, and
then later develop 6 weeks of delusions and hallucinations without prominent mood
symptoms. The diagnosis in this instance would not be Schizoaffective Disorder because
the period of delusions and hallucinations was not continuous with the initial period of
disturbance. Instead, the appropriate diagnoses for the first episode would be Mood
Disorder With Psychotic Features, In Full Remission, and Schizophreniform Disorder
(Provisional) for the current episode.
Mood disturbances, especially depression, commonly develop during the course of
Delusional Disorder. However, such presentations do not meet criteria for Schizoaffec-
tive Disorder because the psychotic symptoms in Delusional Disorder are restricted to
nonbizarre delusions and therefore do not meet Criterion A for Schizoaffective Disorder.
If there is insufficient information concerning the relationship between psychotic
and mood symptoms, Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified may be the most
appropriate diagnosis.
Diagnostic criteria for 295.70 Schizoaffective Disorder
A. An uninterrupted period of illness during which, at some time, there is
either a Major Depressive Episode, a Manic Episode, or a Mixed Episode
concurrent with symptoms that meet Criterion A for Schizophrenia.
Note: The Major Depressive Episode must include Criterion Al: depressed
mood.
(continued)296
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 295.70 Schizoaffective Disorder
(continued)
B. During the same period of illness, there have been delusions or
hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of prominent mood
symptoms.
C. Symptoms that meet criteria for a mood episode are present for a
substantial portion of the total duration of the active and residual periods
of the illness.
D. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
Specify type:
Bipolar Type: if the disturbance includes a Manic or a Mixed Episode (or
a Manic or a Mixed Episode and Major Depressive Episodes)
Depressive Type: if the disturbance only includes Major Depressive
Episodes
297.1 Delusional Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Delusional Disorder is the presence of one or more nonbizarre
delusions that persist for at least 1 month (Criterion A). A diagnosis of Delusional Disorder
is not given if the individual has ever had a symptom presentation that met Criterion A
for Schizophrenia (Criterion B). Auditory or visual hallucinations, if present, are not
prominent. Tactile or olfactory hallucinations may be present (and prominent) if they
are related to the delusional theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects
associated with delusions of infestation, or the perception that one emits a foul odor
from a body orifice associated with delusions of reference). Apart from the direct impact
of the delusions, psychosocial functioning is not markedly impaired, and behavior is
neither obviously odd nor bizarre (Criterion C). If mood episodes occur concurrently
with the delusions, the total duration of these mood episodes is relatively brief compared
to the total duration of the delusional periods (Criterion D). The delusions are not due
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or a general medical
condition (e.g., Alzheimer's disease, systemic lupus erythematosus) (Criterion E).
Although the determination of whether delusions are bizarre is considered to be
especially important in distinguishing between Delusional Disorder and Schizophrenia,
"bizarreness" may be difficult to judge, especially across different cultures. Delusions are
deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible, not understandable, and not derived from
ordinary life experiences (e.g., an individual's belief that a stranger has removed his or
her internal organs and replaced them with someone else's organs without leaving any297.1 Delusional Disorder
297
wounds or scars). In contrast, nonbizarre delusions involve situations that can conceiv-
ably occur in real life (e.g., being followed, poisoned, infected, loved at a distance, or
deceived by one's spouse or lover).
Psychosocial functioning is variable. Some individuals may appear to be relatively
unimpaired in their interpersonal and occupational roles. In others, the impairment may
be substantial and include low or absent occupational functioning and social isolation.
When poor psychosocial functioning is present in Delusional Disorder, it arises directly
from the delusional beliefs themselves. For example, an individual who is convinced
that he will be murdered by "Mafia hit men" may quit his job and refuse to leave his
house except late at night and only when dressed in clothes quite different from his
normal attire. All of this behavior is an understandable attempt to prevent being identified
and killed by his presumed assassins. In contrast, poor functioning in Schizophrenia
may be due to both positive and negative symptoms (particularly avolition). Similarly,
a common characteristic of individuals with Delusional Disorder is the apparent
normality of their behavior and appearance when their delusional ideas are not being
discussed or acted on. In general, social and marital functioning are more likely to be
impaired than intellectual and occupational functioning.
Subtypes
The type of Delusional Disorder may be specified based on the predominant delusional
theme:
ErotomanicType. This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
is that another person is in love with the individual. The delusion often concerns
idealized romantic love and spiritual union rather than sexual attraction. The
person about whom this conviction is held is usually of higher status (e.g., a
famous person or a superior at work), but can be a complete stranger. Efforts to
contact the object of the delusion (through telephone calls, letters, gifts, visits,
and even surveillance and stalking) are common, although occasionally the
person keeps the delusion secret. Most individuals with this subtype in clinical
samples are female; most individuals with this subtype in forensic samples are
male. Some individuals with this subtype, particularly males, come into conflict
with the law in their efforts to pursue the object of their delusion or in a misguided
effort to "rescue" him or her from some imagined danger.
Grandiose Type. This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
is the conviction of having some great (but unrecognized) talent or insight or
having made some important discovery. Less commonly, the individual may have
the delusion of having a special relationship with a prominent person (e.g., an
adviser to the President) or being a prominent person (in which case the actual
person may be regarded as an impostor). Grandiose delusions may have a
religious content (e.g., the person believes that he or she has a special message
from a deity).
Jealous Type. This subtype applies when the central theme of the person's
delusion is that his or her spouse or lover is unfaithful. This belief is arrived at
without due cause and is based on incorrect inferences supported by small bits
of "evidence" (e.g., disarrayed clothing or spots on the sheets), which are
collected and used to justify the delusion. The individual with the delusion usually
confronts the spouse or lover and attempts to intervene in the imagined infidelity298
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
(e.g., restricting the spouse's autonomy, secretly following the spouse, investigat-
ing the imagined lover, attacking the spouse).
PersecutoryType. This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
involves the person's belief that he or she is being conspired against, cheated,
spied on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned, harassed, or
obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small slights may be exaggerated
and become the focus of a delusional system. The focus of the delusion is often
on some injustice that must be remedied by legal action ("querulous paranoia"),
and the affected person may engage in repeated attempts to obtain satisfaction
by appeal to the courts and other government agencies. Individuals with
persecutory delusions are often resentful and angry and may resort to violence
against those they believe are hurting them.
Somatic Type. This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion
involves bodily functions or sensations. Somatic delusions can occur in several
forms. Most common are the person's conviction that he or she emits a foul odor
from the skin, mouth, rectum, or vagina; that there is an infestation of insects on
or in the skin; that there is an internal parasite; that certain parts of the body are
definitely (contrary to all evidence) misshapen or ugly; or that parts of the body
(e.g., the large intestine) are not functioning.
Mixed Type. This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.
Unspecified Type. This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief
cannot be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g.,
referential delusions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component).
Associated Features and Disorders
Social, marital, or work problems can result from the delusional beliefs of Delusional
Disorder. Ideas of reference (e.g., that random events are of special significance) are
common in individuals with this disorder. Their interpretation of these events is usually
consistent with the content of their delusional beliefs. Many individuals with Delusional
Disorder develop irritable or dysphoric mood, which can usually be understood as a
reaction to their delusional beliefs. Especially with the Persecutory and Jealous Types,
marked anger and violent behavior can occur. The individual may engage in litigious
behavior, sometimes leading to hundreds of letters of protest to government and judicial
officials and many court appearances. Legal difficulties can occur in Delusional Disorder,
Jealous Type and Erotomanic Type. Individuals with Delusional Disorder, Somatic Type,
may be subject to unnecessary medical tests and procedures. Hearing deficiency, severe
psychosocial stressors (e.g., immigration), and low socioeconomic status may predispose
an individual to the development of Delusional Disorder. Major Depressive Episodes
probably occur in individuals with Delusional Disorder more frequently than in the
general population. Typically, the depression is relatively mild and begins after the onset
of prominent delusional beliefs. Delusional Disorder may be associated with Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder, Body Dysmorphic Disorder, and Paranoid, Schizoid, or Avoidant
Personality Disorders.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
An individual's cultural and religious background must be taken into account in
evaluating the possible presence of Delusional Disorder. Some cultures have widely297.1 Delusional Disorder
299
held and culturally sanctioned beliefs that might be considered delusional in other
cultures. The content of delusions also varies in different cultures and subcultures.
Delusional Disorder, Jealous Type, is probably more common in men than in women,
but there appears to be no major gender difference in the overall frequency of Delusional
Disorder.
Prevalence
Delusional Disorder is relatively uncommon in clinical settings, with most studies
suggesting that the disorder accounts for l%-2% of admissions to inpatient mental health
facilities. Precise information about the population prevalence of this disorder is lacking,
but the best estimate is around 0.03%. Because of its usually late age at onset, the lifetime
morbidity risk may be between 0.05% and 0.1%.
Course
The age at onset of Delusional Disorder is generally middle or late adult life, but can
be at a younger age. The Persecutory Type is the most common subtype. The course is
quite variable. Especially in the Persecutory Type, the disorder may be chronic, although
a waxing and waning of the preoccupation with the delusional beliefs often occurs. In
other cases, full periods of remission may be followed by subsequent relapses. In yet
other cases, the disorder remits within a few months, often without subsequent relapse.
Some evidence suggests that the Jealous Type may have a better prognosis than the
Persecutory Type.
Familial Pattern
Some studies have found that Delusional Disorder is more common among relatives of
individuals with Schizophrenia than would be expected by chance, whereas other
studies have found no familial relationship between Delusional Disorder and Schizo-
phrenia. There is limited evidence that Avoidant and Paranoid Personality Disorders may
be especially common among first-degree biological relatives of individuals with
Delusional Disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of Delusional Disorder is made only when the delusion is not due to the
direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition. A delirium,
a dementia, and Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition may
present with symptoms that suggest Delusional Disorder. For example, simple persecu-
tory delusions (e.g., "someone comes into my room at night and steals my clothes") in
the early phase of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type would be diagnosed as Dementia
of the Alzheimer's Type, With Delusions. A Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder,
especially due to stimulants such as amphetamines or cocaine, cross-sectionally may be
identical in symptomatology to Delusional Disorder, but can usually be distinguished
by the chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the
delusional beliefs.
Delusional Disorder can be distinguished from Schizophrenia and Schizophreni-300
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
form Disorder by the absence of the other characteristic symptoms of the active phase
of Schizophrenia (e.g., prominent auditory or visual hallucinations, bizarre delusions,
disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, negative symptoms).
Compared with Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder usually produces less impairment
in occupational and social functioning.
It can be difficult to differentiate Mood Disorders With Psychotic Features from
Delusional Disorder, because the psychotic features associated with Mood Disorders
usually involve nonbizarre delusions without prominent hallucinations, and Delusional
Disorder frequently has associated mood symptoms. The distinction depends on the
temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the delusions and on the
severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions occur exclusively during mood episodes,
the diagnosis is Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features. Although depressive symptoms
are common in Delusional Disorder, they are usually mild, remit while the delusional
symptoms persist, and do not warrant a separate Mood Disorder diagnosis. Occasionally,
mood symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode are superimposed on the
delusional disturbance. Delusional Disorder can be diagnosed only if the total duration
of all mood episodes remains brief relative to the total duration of the delusional
disturbance. If symptoms that meet criteria for a mood episode are present for a
substantial portion of the delusional disturbance (i.e., the delusional equivalent of
Schizoaffective Disorder), then a diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified accompanied by either Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified or
Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is appropriate.
Individuals with Shared Psychotic Disorder can present with symptoms that are
similar to those seen in Delusional Disorder, but the disturbance has a characteristic
etiology and course. In Shared Psychotic Disorder, the delusions arise in the context of
a close relationship with another person, are identical in form to the delusions of that
other person, and diminish or disappear when the individual with Shared Psychotic
Disorder is separated from the individual with the primary Psychotic Disorder. Brief
Psychotic Disorder is differentiated from Delusional Disorder by the fact that the
delusional symptoms last less than 1 month. A diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified may be made if insufficient information is available to choose
between Delusional Disorder and other Psychotic Disorders or to determine whether
the presenting symptoms are substance induced or the result of a general medical
condition.
It may be difficult to differentiate Hypochondriasis (especially With Poor Insight)
from Delusional Disorder. In Hypochondriasis, the fears of having a serious disease or
the concern that one has such a serious disease are held with less than delusional
intensity (i.e., the individual can entertain the possibility that the feared disease is not
present). Body Dysmorphic Disorder involves a preoccupation with some imagined
defect in appearance. Many individuals with this disorder hold their beliefs with less
than delusional intensity and recognize that their view of their appearance is distorted.
However, a significant proportion of individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for Body
Dysmorphic Disorder hold their beliefs with delusional intensity. When criteria for both
disorders are met, both Body Dysmorphic Disorder and Delusional Disorder, Somatic
Type, may be diagnosed. The boundary between Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
(especially With Poor Insight) and Delusional Disorder can sometimes be difficult to
establish. The ability of individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder to recognize
that the obsessions or compulsions are excessive or unreasonable occurs on a contin-
uum. In some individuals, reality testing may be lost, and the obsession may reach297.1 Delusional Disorder
301
delusional proportions (e.g., the belief that one has caused the death of another person
by having willed it). If the obsessions develop into sustained delusional beliefs that
represent a major part of the clinical picture, an additional diagnosis of Delusional
Disorder may be appropriate.
In contrast to Delusional Disorder, there are no clear-cut or persisting delusional
beliefs in Paranoid Personality Disorder. Whenever a person with a Delusional
Disorder has a preexisting Personality Disorder, the Personality Disorder should be listed
on Axis II, followed by "Premorbid" in parentheses.
• Diagnostic criteria for 297.1 Delusional Disorder
A. Nonbizarre delusions (i.e., involving situations that occur in real life,
such as being followed, poisoned, infected, loved at a distance, or
deceived by spouse or lover, or having a disease) of at least 1 month's
duration.
B. Criterion A for Schizophrenia has never been met. Note: Tactile and
olfactory hallucinations may be present in Delusional Disorder if they
are related to the delusional theme.
C. Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning
is not markedly impaired and behavior is not obviously odd or bizarre.
D. If mood episodes have occurred concurrently with delusions, their total
duration has been brief relative to the duration of the delusional periods.
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
Specify type (the following types are assigned based on the predominant
delusional theme):
ErotomanicType: delusions that another person, usually of higher status,
is in love with the individual
Grandiose Type: delusions of inflated worth, power, knowledge, identity,
or special relationship to a deity or famous person
Jealous Type: delusions that the individual's sexual partner is unfaithful
Persecutory Type: delusions that the person (or someone to whom the
person is close) is being malevolently treated in some way
Somatic Type: delusions that the person has some physical defect or
general medical condition
Mixed Type: delusions characteristic of more than one of the above types
but no one theme predominates
Unspecified Type302
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
298.8 Brief Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Brief Psychotic Disorder is a disturbance that involves the sudden
onset of at least one of the following positive psychotic symptoms: delusions, halluci-
nations, disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence), or grossly
disorganized or catatonic behavior (Criterion A). An episode of the disturbance lasts at
least 1 day but less than 1 month, and the individual eventually has a full return to the
premorbid level of functioning (Criterion B). The disturbance is not better accounted
for by a Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features, by Schizoaffective Disorder, or by
Schizophrenia and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
hallucinogen) or a general medical condition (e.g., subdural hematoma) (Criterion C).
Specifiers
The following specifiers for Brief Psychotic Disorder may be noted based on the presence
or absence of precipitating stressors:
With Marked Stressor(s). This specifier may be noted if the psychotic symp-
toms develop shortly after and apparently in response to one or more events that,
singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar
circumstances in that person's culture. This type of Brief Psychotic Disorder was
called "brief reactive psychosis" in DSM-III-R. The precipitating event(s) may be
any major stress, such as the loss of a loved one or the psychological trauma of
combat. Determining whether a specific stressor was a precipitant or a conse-
quence of the illness may sometimes be clinically difficult. In such instances, the
decision will depend on related factors such as the temporal relationship between
the stressor and the onset of the symptoms, ancillary information from a spouse
or friend about level of functioning prior to the stressor, and history of similar
responses to stressful events in the past.
Without Marked Stressor(s). This specifier may be noted if the psychotic
symptoms are not apparently in response to events that would be markedly
stressful to almost anyone in similar circumstances in the person's culture.
With Postpartum Onset. This specifier may be noted if the onset of the
psychotic symptoms is within 4 weeks postpartum.
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Brief Psychotic Disorder typically experience emotional turmoil or
overwhelming confusion. They may have rapid shifts from one intense affect to another.
Although brief, the level of impairment may be severe, and supervision may be required
to ensure that nutritional and hygienic needs are met and that the individual is protected
from the consequences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment, or acting on the basis
of delusions. There appears to be an increased risk of mortality (with a particularly high
risk for suicide), especially among younger individuals. Preexisting Personality Disorders
(e.g., Paranoid, Histrionic, Narcissistic, Schizotypal, or Borderline Personality Disorder)
may predispose the individual to the development of the disorder.298.8 Brief Psychotic Disorder
303
Specific Culture Features
It is important to distinguish symptoms of Brief Psychotic Disorder from culturally
sanctioned response patterns. For example, in some religious ceremonies, an individual
may report hearing voices, but these do not generally persist and are not perceived as
abnormal by most members of the person's community.
Prevalence
Limited available evidence suggests that Brief Psychotic Disorder is uncommon.
Course
Brief Psychotic Disorder may appear in adolescence or early adulthood, with the average
age at onset being in the late 20s or early 30s. By definition, a diagnosis of Brief Psychotic
Disorder requires a full remission of all symptoms and a return to the premorbid level
of functioning within 1 month of the onset of the disturbance. In some individuals, the
duration of psychotic symptoms may be quite brief (e.g., a few days).
Familial Pattern
Some evidence suggests that Brief Psychotic Disorder may be related to Mood Disorders,
whereas other evidence suggests that it may be distinct from both Schizophrenia and
Mood Disorders.
Differential
Diagnosis
A wide variety of general medical conditions can present with psychotic symptoms of
short duration. Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition or a
delirium is diagnosed when there is evidence from the history, physical examination,
or laboratory tests that indicates that the delusions or hallucinations are the direct
physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., Cushing's
syndrome, brain tumor) (see p. 306). Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, Sub-
stance-Induced Delirium, and Substance Intoxication are distinguished from Brief
Psychotic Disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or
exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the psychotic symptoms (see
p. 310). Laboratory tests, such as a urine drug screen or a blood alcohol level, may be
helpful in making this determination, as may a careful history of substance use with
attention to temporal relationships between substance intake and onset of the symptoms
and the nature of the substance being used.
The diagnosis of Brief Psychotic Disorder cannot be made if the psychotic symptoms
are better accounted for by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic symptoms occur
exclusively during a full Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episode). If the psychotic
symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the diagnosis is either Schizophreniform
Disorder, Delusional Disorder, Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features, or
Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified, depending on the other symptoms in
the presentation. The differential diagnosis between Brief Psychotic Disorder and
Schizophreniform Disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted304
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
before 1 month in response to successful treatment with medication. Because recurrent
episodes of Brief Psychotic Disorder are rare, careful attention should be given to the
possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., Bipolar Disorder, recurrent acute exacerbations
of Schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes.
An episode of Factitious Disorder, With Predominantly Psychological Signs
and Symptoms, may have the appearance of Brief Psychotic Disorder, but in such cases
there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced. When Malingering
involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence that the illness was
feigned for an understandable goal.
In certain individuals with Personality Disorders, psychosocial stressors may
precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These are usually transient and do not
warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at least 1 day, an
additional diagnosis of Brief Psychotic Disorder may be appropriate.
I Diagnostic criteria for 298.8 Brief Psychotic Disorder
A. Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms:
(1) delusions
(2) hallucinations
(3) disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence)
(4) grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior
Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response
pattern.
B. Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than
1 month, with eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by a Mood Disorder With
Psychotic Features, Schizoaffective Disorder, or Schizophrenia and is
not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition.
Specify if:
With Marked Stressor(s) (brief reactive psychosis): if symptoms occur
shortly after and apparently in response to events that, singly or together,
would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar circumstances in
the person's culture
Without Marked Stressor(s): if psychotic symptoms do not occur shortly
after, or are not apparently in response to events that, singly or together,
would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar circumstances in
the person's culture
With Postpartum Onset: if onset within 4 weeks postpartum297.3 Shared Psychotic Disorder (Folie a Deux)
305
297.3 Shared Psychotic Disorder (Folie a Deux)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Shared Psychotic Disorder (Folie a Deux) is a delusion that
develops in an individual who is involved in a close relationship with another person
(sometimes termed the "inducer" or "the primary case") who already has a Psychotic
Disorder with prominent delusions (Criterion A). The individual comes to share the
delusional beliefs of the primary case in whole or in part (Criterion B), The delusion is
not better accounted for by another Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia) or a Mood
Disorder With Psychotic Features and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., amphetamine) or a general medical condition (e.g., brain tumor)
(Criterion C). Schizophrenia is probably the most common diagnosis of the primary case,
although other diagnoses may include Delusional Disorder or Mood Disorder With
Psychotic Features. The content of the shared delusional beliefs may be dependent on
the diagnosis of the primary case and can include relatively bizarre delusions (e.g., that
radiation is being transmitted into an apartment from a hostile foreign power, causing
indigestion and diarrhea), mood-congruent delusions (e.g., that the primary case will
soon receive a film contract for $2 million, allowing the family to purchase a much larger
home with a swimming pool), or the nonbizarre delusions that are characteristic of
Delusional Disorder (e.g., the FBI is tapping the family telephone and trailing family
members when they go out). Usually the primary case in Shared Psychotic Disorder is
dominant in the relationship and gradually imposes the delusional system on the more
passive and initially healthy second person. Individuals who come to share delusional
beliefs are often related by blood or marriage and have lived together for a long time,
sometimes in relative social isolation. If the relationship with the primary case is
interrupted, the delusional beliefs of the other individual usually diminish or disappear.
Although most commonly seen in relationships of only two people, Shared Psychotic
Disorder can occur among a larger number of individuals, especially in family situations
in which the parent is the primary case and the children, sometimes to varying degrees,
adopt the parent's delusional beliefs. Individuals with this disorder rarely seek treatment
and usually are brought to clinical attention when the primary case receives treatment.
Associated Features and Disorders
Aside from the delusional beliefs, behavior is usually not otherwise odd or unusual in
Shared Psychotic Disorder. Impairment is often less severe in the individual with Shared
Psychotic Disorder than in the primary case.
Prevalence
Little systematic information about the prevalence of Shared Psychotic Disorder is
available. This disorder is rare in clinical settings, although it has been argued that some
cases go unrecognized. Limited evidence suggests that Shared Psychotic Disorder is
somewhat more common in women than in men.306
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
Course
Little is known about the age at onset of Shared Psychotic Disorder, but it appears to
be quite variable. Without intervention, the course is usually chronic, because this
disorder most commonly occurs in relationships that are long-standing and resistant to
change. With separation from the primary case, the individual's delusional beliefs
disappear, sometimes quickly and sometimes quite slowly.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of Shared Psychotic Disorder is made only when the delusion is not due
to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition.
Differential diagnosis is rarely a problem because the history of close association with
the primary case and the similarity of delusions between the two individuals is unique
to Shared Psychotic Disorder. In Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder, Schizoaffec-
tive Disorder, and Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features, there is either no close
relationship with a dominant person who has a Psychotic Disorder and shares similar
delusional beliefs or, if there is such a person, the psychotic symptoms usually precede
the onset of any shared delusions. In rare cases, an individual may present with what
appears to be Shared Psychotic Disorder, but the delusions do not disappear when the
individual is separated from the primary case. In such a situation, it is probably
appropriate to consider another Psychotic Disorder diagnosis.
Diagnostic criteria for 297.3 Shared Psychotic
Disorder
A. A delusion develops in an individual in the context of a close relationship
with another person(s), who has an already-established delusion.
B. The delusion is similar in content to that of the person who already has
the established delusion.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another Psychotic
Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia) or a Mood Disorder With Psychotic
Features and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition.
Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition are
prominent hallucinations or delusions that are judged to be due to the direct physiolog-
ical effects of a general medical condition (Criterion A). There must be evidence fromPsychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
307
the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the delusions or hallucina-
tions are the direct physiological consequence of a general medical condition (Criterion
B). The psychotic disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., the symptoms are not a psychologically mediated response to a severe general
medical condition, in which case a diagnosis of Brief Psychotic Disorder, With Marked
Stressor, would be appropriate) (Criterion C). The diagnosis is not made if the
disturbance occurs only during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). A separate
diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not given if
delusions occur only during the course of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type or Vascular
Dementia; a diagnosis of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type or Vascular Dementia with
the subtype With Delusions is given instead.
Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modality (i.e., visual, olfactory, gustatory,
tactile, or auditory), but certain etiological factors are likely to evoke specific hallucina-
tory phenomena. Olfactory hallucinations, especially those involving the smell of
burning rubber or other unpleasant smells, are highly suggestive of temporal lobe
epilepsy. Hallucinations may vary from simple and unformed to highly complex and
organized, depending on etiological factors, environmental surroundings, nature and
focus of the insult rendered to the central nervous system, and the reactive response to
impairment. Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is generally not
diagnosed if the individual maintains reality testing for the hallucination and appreciates
that the perceptual experiences result from the general medical condition. Delusions
may express a variety of themes, including somatic, grandiose, religious, and, most
commonly, persecutory. Religious delusions have been specifically associated in some
cases with temporal lobe epilepsy. Individuals with right parietal brain lesions can
develop a contralateral neglect syndrome in which they may disown parts of their body
to a delusional extent. On the whole, however, associations between delusions and
particular general medical conditions appear to be less specific than is the case for
hallucinations.
In determining whether the psychotic disturbance is due to a general medical
condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition.
Further, the clinician must establish that the psychotic disturbance is etiologically related
to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and
comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment.
Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship
between the psychotic disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological,
several considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the
presence of a temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the
general medical condition and that of the psychotic disturbance. A second consideration
is the presence of features that are atypical for a primary Psychotic Disorder (e.g., atypical
age at onset or presence of visual or olfactory hallucinations). Evidence from the literature
that suggests that there can be a direct association between the general medical condition
in question and the development of psychotic symptoms can provide a useful context
in the assessment of a particular situation. In addition, the clinician must also judge that
the disturbance is not better accounted for by a primary Psychotic Disorder, a
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, or another primary mental disorder (e.g., Adjust-
ment Disorder). This determination is explained in greater detail in the "Mental Disorders
Due to a General Medical Condition" section (p. 165).308
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
Subtypes
One of the following subtypes may be used to indicate the predominant symptom
presentation. If both delusions and hallucinations are present, code whichever is
predominant:
293-81 With Delusions. This subtype is used if delusions are the predominant
symptom.
293.82 With Hallucinations. This subtype is used if hallucinations are the
predominant symptom.
Recording Procedures
In recording the diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition,
the clinician should first note the presence of the Psychotic Disorder, then the identified
general medical condition judged to be causing the disturbance, and finally the
appropriate specifier indicating the predominant symptom presentation on Axis I (e.g.,
Psychotic Disorder Due to Thyrotoxicosis, With Hallucinations). The diagnostic code on
Axis I is selected based on the subtype: 293.81 for Psychotic Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition, With Delusions, and 293.82 for Psychotic Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition, With Hallucinations. The ICD-9-CM code for the general medical
condition should also be noted on Axis III (e.g., 242.9 thyrotoxicosis). (See Appendix
G for a list of ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for selected general medical conditions.)
Associated General Medical Conditions
A variety of general medical conditions may cause psychotic symptoms, including
neurological conditions (e.g., neoplasms, cerebrovascular disease, Huntington's disease,
epilepsy, auditory nerve injury, deafness, migraine, central nervous system infections),
endocrine conditions (e.g., hyper- and hypothyroidism, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism,
hypoadrenocorticism), metabolic conditions (e.g., hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypoglycemia),
fluid or electrolyte imbalances, hepatic or renal diseases, and autoimmune disorders
with central nervous system involvement (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus). Those
neurological conditions that involve subcortical structures or the temporal lobe are more
commonly associated with delusions. The associated physical examination findings,
laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence or onset reflect the etiological general
medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
Hallucinations and delusions commonly occur in the context of a delirium; however,
a separate diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not
given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. When
delusions develop during the course of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type or Vascular
Dementia, a diagnosis of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type or Vascular Dementia with
the subtype With Delusions is given; a separate diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Due to
a General Medical Condition is not given. If the presentation includes a mix of different
types of symptoms (e.g., psychotic and anxiety), the diagnosis is usually Psychotic
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition because in such situations psychotic
symptoms typically predominate in the clinical picture.Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
309
If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance use (including medications
with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure to a toxin (e.g.,
LSD Intoxication, Alcohol Withdrawal), a Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder
should be considered. It may be useful to obtain a urine or blood drug screen or other
appropriate laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e.,
within 4 weeks of) Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal or after medication use may
be especially indicative of a Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, depending on the
character, duration, or amount of the substance used. If the clinician has ascertained
that the disturbance is due to both a general medical condition and substance use, both
diagnoses (i.e., Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-
Induced Psychotic Disorder) can be given.
Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition must be distinguished from
a primary Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder, Schizoaffec-
tive Disorder) or a primary Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features. In primary
Psychotic Disorders and in primary Mood Disorders With Psychotic Features, no specific
and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a general medical
condition can be demonstrated. Late age at onset (e.g., the first appearance of delusions
in an individual over age 35 years) and the absence of a personal or family history of
Schizophrenia or Delusional Disorder suggest the need for a thorough assessment to
rule out the diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition.
Auditory hallucinations that involve voices speaking complex sentences are more
characteristic of Schizophrenia than of Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition. Other types of hallucinations (e.g., visual, olfactory) commonly signal a
Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition or a Substance-Induced
Psychotic Disorder.
Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is diagnosed when the clinician
cannot determine if the psychotic disturbance is primary, substance induced, or due to
a general medical condition. Hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations may
occur in individuals without a mental disorder, but they occur only on falling asleep or
on awakening.
Diagnostic criteria for 293.xx Psychotic Disorder Due
to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
a general medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
(continued)310
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 293.xx Psychotic Disorder Due
to ... (Indicate the General Medical Condition] (continued)
Code based on predominant symptom:
.81 With Delusions: if delusions are the predominant symptom
.82 With Hallucinations: if hallucinations are the predominant
symptom
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
293.81 Psychotic Disorder Due to Malignant Lung Neoplasm, With Delusions; also
code the general medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).
Coding note: If delusions are part of a preexisting dementia, indicate the delusions
by coding the appropriate subtype of the dementia if one is available, e.g., 290.20
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, With Delusions.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder are prominent halluci-
nations or delusions (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the direct physiological
effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin exposure) (Criterion
B). Hallucinations that the individual realizes are substance induced are not included
here and instead would be diagnosed as Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal
with the accompanying specifier With Perceptual Disturbances. The disturbance must
not be better accounted for by a Psychotic Disorder that is not substance induced
(Criterion C). The diagnosis is not made if the psychotic symptoms occur only during
the course of a delirium (Criterion D). This diagnosis should be made instead of a
diagnosis of Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal only when the psychotic
symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal
syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention. For a more detailed discussion of Substance-Related Disorders, see p. 175.
A Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder is distinguished from a primary Psychotic
Disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse, there
must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of
intoxication or withdrawal. Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorders arise only in associ-
ation with intoxication or withdrawal states, whereas primary Psychotic Disorders may
precede the onset of substance use or may occur during times of sustained abstinence.
Once initiated, the psychotic symptoms may continue as long as the substance use
continues. Because the withdrawal state for some substances can be relatively protracted,
the onset of psychotic symptoms can occur up to 4 weeks after the cessation of substance
use. Another consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of a primary
Psychotic Disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the appearance
of delusions de novo in a person over age 35 years without a known history of a primary
Psychotic Disorder should alert the clinician to the possibility of a Substance-Induced
Psychotic Disorder. Even a prior history of a primary Psychotic Disorder does not ruleSubstance-Induced Psychotic Disorder
311
out the possibility of a Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder. It has been suggested that
9 out of 10 nonauditory hallucinations are the product of a Substance-Induced Psychotic
Disorder or a Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. In contrast, factors
that suggest that the psychotic symptoms are better accounted for by a primary Psychotic
Disorder include persistence of psychotic symptoms for a substantial period of time (i.e.,
about a month) after the end of Substance Intoxication or acute Substance Withdrawal;
the development of symptoms that are substantially in excess of what would be expected
given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use; or a history of
prior recurrent primary Psychotic Disorders. Other causes of psychotic symptoms must
be considered even in a person with Intoxication or Withdrawal, because substance use
problems are not uncommon among persons with (presumably) non-substance-induced
Psychotic Disorders,
Subtypes and Specifiers
One of the following subtypes may be used to indicate the predominant symptom
presentation. If both delusions and hallucinations are present, code whichever is
predominant:
With Delusions. This subtype is used if delusions are the predominant
symptom.
With Hallucinations. This subtype is used if hallucinations are the predomi-
nant symptom.
The context of the development of the psychotic symptoms may be indicated by
using one of the specifiers listed below:
With Onset During Intoxication. This specifier should be used if criteria for
intoxication with the substance are met and the symptoms develop during the
intoxication syndrome.
With Onset During Withdrawal. This specifier should be used if criteria for
withdrawal from the substance are met and the symptoms develop during, or
shortly after, a withdrawal syndrome.
Recording Procedures
The name of the Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, methylphenidate, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be
causing the psychotic symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the listing of
classes of substances provided in the criteria set. For substances that do not fit into any
of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for "Other Substance" should be used.
In addition, for medications prescribed at therapeutic doses, the specific medication can
be indicated by listing the appropriate E-code on Axis I (see Appendix G). The code for
each of the specific Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorders depends on whether the
presentation is predominated by delusions or hallucinations: 292.11 for With Delusions
and 292.12 for With Hallucinations, except for alcohol, for which the code is 291.5 for
With Delusions and 291.3 for With Hallucinations. The name of the disorder (e.g.,
Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder; Methylphenidate-Induced Psychotic Disorder) is
followed by the subtype indicating the predominant symptom presentation and the
specifier indicating the context in which the symptoms developed (e.g., 292.11 Cocaine-312
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions, With Onset During Intoxication; 292.12
Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations, With Onset During
Intoxication). When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the
development of the psychotic symptoms, each should be listed separately. If a substance
is judged to be the etiological factor, but the specific substance or class of substance is
unknown, the category 292.11 Unknown Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With
Delusions, or 292.12 Unknown Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucina
tions, may be used.
Specific Substances
Psychotic Disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following
classes of substances: alcohol; amphetamine and related substances; cannabis; cocaine;
hallucinogens; inhalants; opioids (meperidine); phencyclidine and related substances;
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other or unknown substances. Psychotic
Disorders can occur in association with withdrawal from the following classes of
substances: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other or unknown
substances. The initiation of the disorder may vary considerably with the substance. For
example, smoking a high dose of cocaine may produce psychosis within minutes,
whereas days or weeks of high-dose alcohol or sedative use may be required to produce
psychosis. Hallucinations may occur in any modality. In Alcohol-Induced Psychotic
Disorder, With Hallucinations, With Onset During Withdrawal, vivid, persistent, and
usually unpleasant hallucinations develop shortly (within 48 hours) after cessation of or
reduction in alcohol ingestion. This disorder occurs only after prolonged, heavy ingestion
of alcohol in people who apparently have Alcohol Dependence. The auditory halluci-
nations are usually voices, but there may also be visual or tactile hallucinations.
The Psychotic Disorders induced by intoxication with amphetamine and cocaine
share similar clinical features. Persecutory delusions may rapidly develop shortly after
use of amphetamine or a similarly acting sympathomimetic. Distortion of body image
and misperception of people's faces may occur. The hallucination of bugs or vermin
crawling in or under the skin (formication) can lead to scratching and extensive skin
excoriations. Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder may develop shortly after cannabis
use and usually involves persecutory delusions. The disorder is apparently rare. Marked
anxiety, emotional lability, depersonalization, and subsequent amnesia for the episode
can occur. The disorder usually remits within a day, but in some cases may persist for
a few days. Hallucinations associated with Cannabis Intoxication are rare except when
very high blood levels are reached.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorders may at times not resolve promptly when the
offending agent is removed. Agents such as amphetamines, phencyclidine, and cocaine
have been reported to evoke temporary psychotic states that can sometimes persist for
weeks or longer despite removal of the agent and treatment with neuroleptics. These
may be initially difficult to distinguish from non-substance-induced Psychotic Disorders.
Some of the medications reported to evoke psychotic symptoms include anesthetics
and analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive
and cardiovascular medications, antimicrobial medications, antiparkinsonian medica-
tions, chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporine and procarbazine), corticosteroids,
gastrointestinal medications, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medica-
tions, other over-the-counter medications (e.g., phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine),Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder
313
antidepressant medication, and disulfiram. Toxins reported to induce psychotic symp-
toms include anticholinesterase, organophosphate insecticides, nerve gases, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide, and volatile substances such as fuel or paint.
Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder should be made instead of a
diagnosis of Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal only when the
psychotic symptoms are judged to be in excess of those usually associated with the
intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention. Individuals intoxicated with stimulants, cannabis,
the opioid meperidine, or phencyclidine, or those withdrawing from alcohol or sedatives,
may experience altered perceptions (scintillating lights, sounds, visual illusions) that they
recognize as drug effects. If reality testing for these experiences remains intact (i.e., the
person recognizes that the perception is substance induced and neither believes in nor
acts on it), the diagnosis is not Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder. Instead, Sub-
stance Intoxication or Withdrawal, With Perceptual Disturbances, is diagnosed
(e.g., Cocaine Intoxication, With Perceptual Disturbances). "Flashback" hallucination
that can occur long after the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diagnosed as
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (see p. 233). Moreover, if substance
induced psychotic symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium, as in
some severe forms of Alcohol Withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms are considered to
be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed separately.
A Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder is distinguished from a primary Psychotic
Disorder by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms
(see p. 310).
A Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental
or general medical condition must have its onset while the person is receiving the
medication (or during withdrawal, if there is a withdrawal syndrome associated 'with the
medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the psychotic symptoms will usually
remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance and the
presence of a withdrawal syndrome). If symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes
for the psychotic symptoms should be considered. Because individuals with general
medical conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must
consider the possibility that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physiological
consequences of the general medical condition rather than the medication, in which
case Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is diagnosed. The
history often provides the primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the
treatment for the general medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontin-
uation) may be needed to determine empirically for that person whether the medication
is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both
a general medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., Psychotic Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder) may
be given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the psychotic
symptoms are due to a substance (including a medication) or to a general medical
condition or are primary (i.e., not due to either a substance or a general medical
condition), Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified would be indicated.314
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced
Psychotic Disorder
A. Prominent hallucinations or delusions. Note: Do not include halluci-
nations if the person has insight that they are substance induced.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of either (1) or (2):
(1) the symptoms in Criterion A developed during, or within a month
of, Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal
(2) medication use is etiologically related to the disturbance
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by a Psychotic Disorder that
is not substance induced. Evidence that the symptoms are better
accounted for by a Psychotic Disorder that is not substance induced
might include the following: the symptoms precede the onset of the
substance use (or medication use); the symptoms persist for a substantial
period of time (e.g., about a month) after the cessation of acute
withdrawal or severe intoxication, or are substantially in excess of what
would be expected given the type or amount of the substance used or
the duration of use; or there is other evidence that suggests the existence
of an independent non-substance-induced Psychotic Disorder (e.g., a
history of recurrent non-substance-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxi-
cation or Substance Withdrawal only when the symptoms are in excess of those
usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when the
symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Code [Specific Substancej-lnduced Psychotic Disorder:
(291.5 Alcohol, With Delusions; 291.3 Alcohol, With Hallucinations; 292.11
Amphetamine [or Amphetamine-Like Substance], With Delusions; 292.12
Amphetamine [or Amphetamine-Like Substance], With Hallucinations;
292.11 Cannabis, With Delusions; 292.12 Cannabis, With Hallucinations;
292.11 Cocaine, With Delusions; 292.12 Cocaine, With Hallucinations;
292.11 Hallucinogen, With Delusions; 292.12 Hallucinogen, With Halluci-
nations; 292.11 Inhalant, With Delusions; 292.12 Inhalant, With Hallucina-
tions; 292.11 Opioid, With Delusions; 292.12 Opioid, With Hallucinations;
292.11 Phencyclidine [or Phencyclidine-Like Substance], With Delusions;
292.12 Phencyclidine [or Phencyclidine-Like Substance], With Hallucina-
tions; 292.11 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic, With Delusions; 292.12
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic, With Hallucinations; 292.11 Other [or
Unknown] Substance, With Delusions; 292.12 Other [or Unknown] Sub-
stance, With Hallucinations)
(continued)298.9 Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
315
D Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (continued)
Specify if (see table on p. 177 for applicability by substance):
With Onset During Intoxication: if criteria are met for Intoxication with
the substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication
syndrome
With Onset During Withdrawal: if criteria are met for Withdrawal from
the substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, a
withdrawal syndrome
298.9 Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category includes psychotic symptomatology (i.e., delusions, hallucinations, disor-
ganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior) about which there is
inadequate information to make a specific diagnosis or about which there is contradictory
information, or disorders with psychotic symptoms that do not meet the criteria for any
specific Psychotic Disorder.
Examples include:
1. Postpartum psychosis that does not meet criteria for Mood Disorder With
Psychotic Features, Brief Psychotic Disorder, Psychotic Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition, or Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder
2. Psychotic symptoms that have lasted for less than 1 month but that have not yet
remitted, so that the criteria for Brief Psychotic Disorder are not met
3. Persistent auditory hallucinations in the absence of any other features
4. Persistent nonbizarre delusions with periods of overlapping mood episodes that
have been present for a substantial portion of the delusional disturbance
5. Situations in which the clinician has concluded that a Psychotic Disorder is
present, but is unable to determine whether it is primary, due to a general medical
condition, or substance inducedThis page intentionally left blankMood Disorders
T
he Mood Disorders section includes disorders that have a disturbance in mood as
the predominant feature. The section is divided into three parts. The first part
describes mood episodes (Major Depressive Episode, Manic Episode, Mixed Episode,
and Hypomanic Episode) that have been included separately at the beginning of this
section for convenience in diagnosing the various Mood Disorders. These episodes do
not have their own diagnostic codes and cannot be diagnosed as separate entities;
however, they serve as the building blocks for the disorder diagnoses. The second part
describes the Mood Disorders (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic Disorder,
Bipolar I Disorder). The criteria sets for most of the Mood Disorders require the presence
or absence of the mood episodes described in the first part of the section. The third part
includes the specifiers that describe either the most recent mood episode or the course
of recurrent episodes.
The Mood Disorders are divided into the Depressive Disorders ("unipolar depres-
sion"), the Bipolar Disorders, and two disorders based on etiology—Mood Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Mood Disorder. The Depressive
Disorders (i.e., Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic Disorder, and Depressive Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified) are distinguished from the Bipolar Disorders by the fact that
there is no history of ever having had a Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode. The
Bipolar Disorders (i.e., Bipolar I Disorder, Bipolar II Disorder, Cyclothymic Disorder,
and Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified) involve the presence (or history) of Manic
Episodes, Mixed Episodes, or Hypomanic Episodes, usually accompanied by the
presence (or history) of Major Depressive Episodes.
Major Depressive Disorder is characterized by one or more Major Depressive
Episodes (i.e., at least 2 weeks of depressed mood or loss of interest accompanied by
at least four additional symptoms of depression).
Dysthymic Disorder is characterized by at least 2 years of depressed mood for
more days than not, accompanied by additional depressive symptoms that do not meet
criteria for a Major Depressive Episode.
Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding disorders
with depressive features that do not meet criteria for Major Depressive Disorder,
Dysthymic Disorder, Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood, or Adjustment Disor-
der With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood (or depressive symptoms about which
there is inadequate or contradictory information).
Bipolar I Disorder is characterized by one or more Manic or Mixed Episodes,
usually accompanied by Major Depressive Episodes.
317318
Mood Disorders
Bipolar II Disorder is characterized by one or more Major Depressive Episodes
accompanied by at least one Hypomanic Episode.
Cyclothymic Disorder is characterized by at least 2 years of numerous periods of
hypomanic symptoms that do not meet criteria for a Manic Episode and numerous
periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet criteria for a Major Depressive Episode.
Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding disorders with
bipolar features that do not meet criteria for any of the specific Bipolar Disorders defined
in this section (or bipolar symptoms about which there is inadequate or contradictory
information).
Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is characterized by a
prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that is judged to be a direct physiological
consequence of a general medical condition.
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is characterized by a prominent and persistent
disturbance in mood that is judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a drug
of abuse, a medication, another somatic treatment for depression, or toxin exposure.
Mood Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding disorders with
mood symptoms that do not meet the criteria for any specific Mood Disorder and in
which it is difficult to choose between Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified and
Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (e.g., acute agitation).
The specifiers described in the third part of the section are provided to increase
diagnostic specificity, create more homogeneous subgroups, assist in treatment selection,
and improve the prediction of prognosis. Some of the specifiers describe the current (or
most recent) mood episode (i.e., Severity/Psychotic/Remission, Chronic, With
Catatonic Features, With Melancholic Features, With Atypical Features, With
Postpartum Onset). Table 1 (p. 376) indicates which episode specifiers apply to each
codable Mood Disorder. Other specifiers describe the course of recurrent mood episodes
(i.e., Longitudinal Course Specifiers, With Seasonal Pattern, With Rapid Cycling).
Table 2 (p. 388) indicates which course specifiers apply to each codable Mood Disorder.
The specifiers that indicate severity, remission, and psychotic features can be coded in
the fifth digit of the diagnostic code for most of the Mood Disorders. The other specifiers
cannot be coded.
The Mood Disorders section is organized as follows:
• Mood Episodes
Major Depressive Episode (p. 320)
Manic Episode (p. 328)
Mixed Episode (p. 333)
Hypomanic Episode (p. 335)
• Depressive Disorders
296.xx Major Depressive Disorder (p. 339)
300.4 Dysthymic Disorder (p. 345)
311
Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (p. 350)
• Bipolar Disorders
296.xx Bipolar I Disorder (p. 350)
296.89 Bipolar II Disorder (p. 359)
301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder (p. 363)
296.80 Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (p. 366)Mood Disorders
319
• Other Mood Disorders
293.83 Mood Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
(p. 366)
29x.xx Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (p. 370)
296.90 Mood Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (p. 375)
• Specifiers describing the most recent mood episode
Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features, Severe With Psychotic
Features, In Partial Remission, In Full Remission (for Major Depressive
Episode, p. 376; for Manic Episode, p. 378; for Mixed Episode, p. 380)
Chronic (p. 382)
With Catatonic Features (p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (p. 383)
With Atypical Features (p. 384)
With Postpartum Onset (p. 386)
• Specifiers describing course of recurrent episodes
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With or Without Full Interepisode Recovery)
(p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (p. 390)
Recording Procedures for Major Depressive Disorder and
Bipolar I and Bipolar II Disorders
Selecting diagnostic codes.
The diagnostic codes are selected as follows:
For Major Depressive Disorder:
1. The first three digits are 296.
2. The fourth digit is either 2 (if there is only a single Major Depressive Episode)
or 3 (if there are recurrent Major Depressive Episodes).
3. The fifth digit indicates the following: 1 for Mild severity, 2 for Moderate severity,
3 for Severe Without Psychotic Features, 4 for Severe With Psychotic Features,
5 for In Partial Remission, 6 for In Full Remission, and 0 if Unspecified.
For Bipolar I Disorder:
1. The first three digits are also 296.
2. The fourth digit is 0 if there is a single Manic Episode. For recurrent episodes,
the fourth digit is 4 if the current or most recent episode is a Hypomanic Episode
or a Manic Episode, 6 if it is a Mixed Episode, 5 if it is a Major Depressive Episode,
and 7 if the current or most recent episode is Unspecified.
3. The fifth digit (except for Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic,
and Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Unspecified) indicates the follow-
ing: 1 for Mild severity, 2 for Moderate severity, 3 for Severe Without Psychotic
Features, 4 for Severe With Psychotic Features, 5 for In Partial Remission, 6 for
In Full Remission, and 0 if Unspecified. For Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent
Episode Hypomanic, the fifth digit is always "0." For Bipolar Disorder, Most
Recent Episode Unspecified, there is no fifth digit.320
Mood Disorders
For Bipolar n Disorder, the diagnostic code is 296.89-
Recording the name of the diagnosis.
should be listed in the following order:
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms
1. Name of disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Bipolar Disorder)
2. Specifiers coded in the fourth digit (e.g., Recurrent, Most Recent Episode Manic)
3. Specifiers coded in the fifth digit (e.g., Mild, Severe With Psychotic Features, In
Partial Remission)
4. As many specifiers (without codes) as apply to the most recent episode (e.g.,
With Melancholic Features, With Postpartum Onset)
5. As many specifiers (without codes) as apply to the course of recurrent episodes
(e.g., With Seasonal Pattern, With Rapid Cycling)
The following examples illustrate how to record a Mood Disorder diagnosis with
specifiers:
• 296.32 Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Moderate, With Atypical Features,
With Seasonal Pattern, With Full Interepisode Recovery
• 296.54 Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, Severe With Psychotic
Features, With Melancholic Features, With Rapid Cycling
Mood Episode
Major Depressive Episode
Episode Features
The essential feature of a Major Depressive Episode is a period of at least 2 weeks during
which there is either depressed mood or the loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all
activities. In children and adolescents, the mood may be irritable rather than sad. The
individual must also experience at least four additional symptoms drawn from a list that
includes changes in appetite or weight, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased
energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making
decisions; or recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation, plans, or attempts. To
count toward a Major Depressive Episode, a symptom must either be newly present or
must have clearly worsened compared with the person's preepisode status. The
symptoms must persist for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 2 consecutive
weeks. The episode must be accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. For some individuals
with milder episodes, functioning may appear to be normal, but requires markedly
increased effort.
The mood in a Major Depressive Episode is often described by the person as
depressed, sad, hopeless, discouraged, or "down in the dumps" (Criterion Al). In some
cases, sadness may be denied at first, but may subsequently be elicited by interview
(e.g., by pointing out that the individual looks as if he or she is about to cry). In some
individuals who complain of feeling "blah," having no feelings, or feeling anxious, theMajor Depressive Episode
321
presence of a depressed mood can be inferred from the person's facial expression and
demeanor. Some individuals emphasize somatic complaints (e.g., bodily aches and
pains) rather than reporting feelings of sadness. Many individuals report or exhibit
increased irritability (e.g., persistent anger, a tendency to respond to events with angry
outbursts or blaming others, or an exaggerated sense of frustration over minor matters).
In children and adolescents, an irritable or cranky mood may develop rather than a sad
or dejected mood. This presentation should be differentiated from a "spoiled child"
pattern of irritability when frustrated.
Loss of interest or pleasure is nearly always present, at least to some degree.
Individuals may report feeling less interested in hobbies, "not caring anymore," or not
feeling any enjoyment in activities that were previously considered pleasurable (Criterion
A2). Family members often notice social withdrawal or neglect of pleasurable avocations
(e.g., a formerly avid golfer no longer plays, a child who used to enjoy soccer finds
excuses not to practice). In some individuals, there is a significant reduction from
previous levels of sexual interest or desire.
Appetite is usually reduced, and many individuals feel that they have to force
themselves to eat. Other individuals, particularly those encountered in ambulatory
settings, may have increased appetite and may crave specific foods (e.g., sweets or other
carbohydrates). When appetite changes are severe (in either direction), there may be a
significant loss or gain in weight, or, in children, a failure to make expected weight gains
may be noted (Criterion A3).
The most common sleep disturbance associated with a Major Depressive Episode
is insomnia (Criterion A4). Individuals typically have middle insomnia (i.e., waking up
during the night and having difficulty returning to sleep) or terminal insomnia (i.e.,
waking too early and being unable to return to sleep). Initial insomnia (i.e., difficulty
falling asleep) may also occur. Less frequently, individuals present with oversleeping
(hypersomnia) in the form of prolonged sleep episodes at night or increased daytime
sleep. Sometimes the reason that the individual seeks treatment is for the disturbed sleep.
Psychomotor changes include agitation (e.g., the inability to sit still, pacing,
hand-wringing; or pulling or rubbing of the skin, clothing, or other objects) or retardation
(e.g., slowed speech, thinking, and body movements; increased pauses before answer-
ing; speech that is decreased in volume, inflection, amount, or variety of content, or
muteness) (Criterion A5). The psychomotor agitation or retardation must be severe
enough to be observable by others and not represent merely subjective feelings.
Decreased energy, tiredness, and fatigue are common (Criterion A6). A person may
report sustained fatigue without physical exertion. Even the smallest tasks seem to
require substantial effort. The efficiency with which tasks are accomplished may be
reduced. For example, an individual may complain that washing and dressing in the
morning are exhausting and take twice as long as usual.
The sense of worthlessness or guilt associated with a Major Depressive Episode may
include unrealistic negative evaluations of one's worth or guilty preoccupations or
ruminations over minor past failings (Criterion A7). Such individuals often misinterpret
neutral or trivial day-to-day events as evidence of personal defects and have an
exaggerated sense of responsibility for untoward events. For example, a realtor may
become preoccupied with self-blame for failing to make sales even when the market
has collapsed generally and other realtors are equally unable to make sales. The sense
of worthlessness or guilt may be of delusional proportions (e.g., an individual who is
convinced that he or she is personally responsible for world poverty). Blaming oneself
for being sick and for failing to meet occupational or interpersonal responsibilities as a322
Mood Disorders
result of the depression is very common and, unless delusional, is not considered
sufficient to meet this criterion.
Many individuals report impaired ability to think, concentrate, or make decisions
(Criterion A8). They may appear easily distracted or complain of memory difficulties.
Those in intellectually demanding academic or occupational pursuits are often unable
to function adequately even when they have mild concentration problems (e.g., a
computer programmer who can no longer perform complicated but previously manage-
able tasks). In children, a precipitous drop in grades may reflect poor concentration. In
elderly individuals with a Major Depressive Episode, memory difficulties may be the
chief complaint and may be mistaken for early signs of a dementia ("pseudodementia").
When the Major Depressive Episode is successfully treated, the memory problems often
fully abate. However, in some individuals, particularly elderly persons, a Major Depres
sive Episode may sometimes be the initial presentation of an irreversible dementia.
Frequently there may be thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempts
(Criterion A9). These thoughts range from a belief that others would be better off if the
person were dead, to transient but recurrent thoughts of committing suicide, to actual
specific plans of how to commit suicide. The frequency, intensity, and lethality of these
thoughts can be quite variable. Less severely suicidal individuals may report transient
(1- to 2-minute), recurrent (once or twice a week) thoughts. More severely suicidal
individuals may have acquired materials (e.g., a rope or a gun) to be used in the suicide
attempt and may have established a location and time when they will be isolated from
others so that they can accomplish the suicide. Although these behaviors are associated
statistically with suicide attempts and may be helpful in identifying a high-risk group,
many studies have shown that it is not possible to predict accurately whether or when
a particular individual with depression will attempt suicide. Motivations for suicide may
include a desire to give up in the face of perceived insurmountable obstacles or an
intense wish to end an excruciatingly painful emotional state that is perceived by the
person to be without end.
A diagnosis of a Major Depressive Episode is not made if the symptoms meet criteria
for a Mixed Episode (Criterion B). A Mixed Episode is characterized by the symptoms
of both a Manic Episode and a Major Depressive Episode occurring nearly every day for
at least a 1-week period.
The degree of impairment associated with a Major Depressive Episode varies, but
even in mild cases, there must be either clinically significant distress or some interference
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). If
impairment is severe, the person may lose the ability to function socially or occupation-
ally. In extreme cases, the person may be unable to perform minimal self-care (e.g.,
feeding or clothing self) or to maintain minimal personal hygiene.
A careful interview is essential to elicit symptoms of a Major Depressive Episode.
Reporting may be compromised by difficulties in concentrating, impaired memory, or a
tendency to deny, discount, or explain away symptoms. Information from additional
informants can be especially helpful in clarifying the course of current or prior Major
Depressive Episodes and in assessing whether there have been any Manic or Hypomanic
Episodes. Because Major Depressive Episodes can begin gradually, a review of clinical
information that focuses on the worst part of the current episode may be most likely to
detect the presence of symptoms. The evaluation of the symptoms of a Major Depressive
Episode is especially difficult when they occur in an individual who also has a general
medical condition (e.g., cancer, stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetes). Some of the
criterion items of a Major Depressive Episode are identical to the characteristic signs andMajor Depressive Episode
323
symptoms of general medical conditions (e.g., weight loss with untreated diabetes,
fatigue with cancer). Such symptoms should count toward a Major Depressive Episode
except when they are clearly and fully accounted for by a general medical condition.
For example, weight loss in a person with ulcerative colitis who has many bowel
movements and little food intake should not be counted toward a Major Depressive
Episode. On the other hand, when sadness, guilt, insomnia, or weight loss are present
in a person with a recent myocardial infarction, each symptom would count toward a
Major Depressive Episode because these are not clearly and fully accounted for by the
physiological effects of a myocardial infarction. Similarly, when symptoms are clearly
due to mood-incongruent delusions or hallucinations (e.g., a 30-pound weight loss
related to not eating because of a delusion that one's food is being poisoned), these
symptoms do not count toward a Major Depressive Episode.
By definition, a Major Depressive Episode is not due to the direct physiological
effects of a drug of abuse (e.g., in the context of Alcohol Intoxication or Cocaine
Withdrawal), to the side effects of medications or treatments (e.g., steroids), or to toxin
exposure. Similarly, the episode is not due to the direct physiological effects of a general
medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism) (Criterion D). Moreover, if the symptoms begin
within 2 months of the loss of a loved one and do not persist beyond these 2 months,
they are generally considered to result from Bereavement (see p. 684), unless they are
associated with marked functional impairment or include morbid preoccupation with
worthlessness, suicidal ideation, psychotic symptoms, or psychomotor retardation
(Criterion E).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with a Major
Depressive Episode frequently present with tearfulness, irritability, brooding, obsessive
rumination, anxiety, phobias, excessive worry over physical health, and complaints of
pain (e.g., headaches or joint, abdominal, or other pains). During a Major Depressive
Episode, some individuals have Panic Attacks that occur in a pattern that meets criteria
for Panic Disorder. In children, separation anxiety may occur. Some individuals note
difficulty in intimate relationships, less satisfying social interactions, or difficulties in
sexual functioning (e.g., anorgasmia in women or erectile dysfunction in men). There
may be marital problems (e.g., divorce), occupational problems (e.g., loss of job),
academic problems (e.g., truancy, school failure), Alcohol or Other Substance Abuse,
or increased utilization of medical services. The most serious consequence of a Major
Depressive Episode is attempted or completed suicide. Suicide risk is especially high for
individuals with psychotic features, a history of previous suicide attempts, a family history
of completed suicides, or concurrent substance use. There may also be an increased
rate of premature death from general medical conditions. Major Depressive Episodes
often follow psychosocial stressors (e.g., the death of a loved one, marital separation,
divorce). Childbirth may precipitate a Major Depressive Episode, in which case the
specifier With Postpartum Onset is noted (see p. 386).
Associated laboratory findings. No laboratory findings that are diagnostic of a
Major Depressive Episode have been identified. However, a variety of laboratory findings
have been noted to be abnormal in groups of individuals with Major Depressive Episodes
compared with control subjects. It appears that the same laboratory abnormalities are324
Mood Disorders
associated with a Major Depressive Episode regardless of whether the episode is part of
a Major Depressive, Bipolar I, or Bipolar II Disorder. Most laboratory abnormalities are
state dependent (i.e., affected by the presence or absence of depressive symptoms), but
some findings may precede the onset of the episode or persist after its remission.
Laboratory tests are more likely to be abnormal in episodes with melancholic or psychotic
features and in more severely depressed individuals.
Sleep EEG abnormalities may be evident in 40%-60% of outpatients and in up to
90% of inpatients with a Major Depressive Episode. The most frequently associated
polysomnographic findings include 1) sleep continuity disturbances, such as prolonged
sleep latency, increased intermittent wakefulness, and early morning awakening;
2) reduced non—rapid eye movement (NREM) stages 3 and 4 sleep (slow-wave sleep),
with a shift in slow-wave activity away from the first NREM period; 3) decreased rapid
eye movement (REM) latency (i.e., shortened duration of the first NREM period);
4) increased phasic REM activity (i.e., the number of actual eye movements during REM);
and 5) increased duration of REM sleep early in the night. Some evidence suggests that
these sleep abnormalities may sometimes persist after clinical remission or may precede
the onset of the initial Major Depressive Episode.
Neurotransmitters implicated in the pathophysiology of a Major Depressive Episode
include norepinephrine, serotonin, acetylcholine, dopamine, and gamma-aminobutyric
acid. Evidence that implicates these neurotransmitters includes measures of their levels
in blood, cerebrospinal fluid, or urine and platelet receptor functioning. Other laboratory
tests that have demonstrated abnormalities include the dexamethasone suppression test,
other neuroendocrine challenges, functional and structural brain imaging, evoked
potentials, and waking EEG.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Culture can influence the experience and communication of symptoms of depression.
Underdiagnosis or misdiagnosis can be reduced by being alert to ethnic and cultural
specificity in the presenting complaints of a Major Depressive Episode. For example, in
some cultures, depression may be experienced largely in somatic terms, rather than with
sadness or guilt. Complaints of "nerves" and headaches (in Latino and Mediterranean
cultures), of weakness, tiredness, or "imbalance" (in Chinese and Asian cultures), of
problems of the "heart" (in Middle Eastern cultures), or of being "heartbroken" (among
Hopi) may express the depressive experience. Such presentations combine features of
the Depressive, Anxiety, and Somatoform Disorders. Cultures also may differ in
judgments about the seriousness of experiencing or expressing dysphoria (e.g., irritability
may provoke greater concern than sadness or withdrawal). Culturally distinctive
experiences (e.g., fear of being hexed or bewitched, feelings of "heat in the head" or
crawling sensations of worms or ants, or vivid feelings of being visited by those who
have died) must be distinguished from actual hallucinations or delusions that may be
part of a Major Depressive Episode, With Psychotic Features. It is also imperative that
the clinician not routinely dismiss a symptom merely because it is viewed as the "norm"
for a culture.
The core symptoms of a Major Depressive Episode are the same for children and
adolescents, although there are data that suggest that the prominence of characteristic
symptoms may change with age. Certain symptoms such as somatic complaints,
irritability, and social withdrawal are particularly common in children, whereas psycho-Major Depressive Episode
325
motor retardation, hypersomnia, and delusions are less common in prepuberty than in
adolescence and adulthood. In prepubertal children, Major Depressive Episodes occur
more frequently in conjunction with other mental disorders (especially Disruptive
Behavior Disorders, Attention-Deficit Disorders, and Anxiety Disorders) than in isolation.
In adolescents, Major Depressive Episodes are frequently associated with Disruptive
Behavior Disorders, Attention-Deficit Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, Substance-Related
Disorders, and Eating Disorders. In elderly adults, cognitive symptoms (e.g., disorienta-
tion, memory loss, and distractibility) may be particularly prominent.
A significant proportion of women report a worsening of the symptoms of a Major
Depressive Episode several days before the onset of menses. Studies indicate that
depressive episodes occur twice as frequently in women as in men. See the correspond-
ing sections of the texts for Major Depressive Disorder (p. 341), Bipolar I Disorder
(p. 352), and Bipolar II Disorder (p. 360) for specific information on gender.
Course
Symptoms of a Major Depressive Episode usually develop over days to weeks. A
prodromal period that may include anxiety symptoms and mild depressive symptoms
may last for weeks to months before the onset of a full Major Depressive Episode. The
duration of a Major Depressive Episode is also variable. An untreated episode typically
lasts 6 months or longer, regardless of age at onset. In a majority of cases, there is
complete remission of symptoms, and functioning returns to the premorbid level. In a
significant proportion of cases (perhaps 20%-30%), some depressive symptoms insuffi-
cient to meet full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode may persist for months to years
and may be associated with some disability or distress (in which case the specifier In
Partial Remission may be noted; p. 377). Partial remission following a Major Depressive
Episode appears to be predictive of a similar pattern after subsequent episodes. In some
individuals (5%-10%), the full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode continue to be
met for 2 or more years (in which case the specifier Chronic may be noted; see p. 382).
Differential
Diagnosis
A Major Depressive Episode must be distinguished from a Mood Disorder Due to a
General Medical Condition. The appropriate diagnosis would be Mood Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition if the mood disturbance is judged to be the direct
physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., multiple
sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism) (see p. 366). This determination is based on the history,
laboratory findings, or physical examination. If both a Major Depressive Episode and a
general medical condition are present but it is judged that the depressive symptoms are
not the direct physiological consequence of the general medical condition, then the
primary Mood Disorder is recorded on Axis I (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder) and the
general medical condition is recorded on Axis III (e.g., myocardial infarction). This would
be the case, for example, if the Major Depressive Episode is considered to be the
psychological consequence of having the general medical condition or if there is no
etiological relationship between the Major Depressive Episode and the general medical
condition.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from a Major Depressive
Episode by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin) is326
Mood Disorders
judged to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance (see p. 370). For example,
depressed mood that occurs only in the context of withdrawal from cocaine would be
diagnosed as Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features, With Onset
During Withdrawal.
In elderly persons, it is often difficult to determine whether cognitive symptoms
(e.g., disorientation, apathy, difficulty concentrating, memory loss) are better accounted
for by a dementia or by a Major Depressive Episode. A thorough medical evaluation
and an evaluation of the onset of the disturbance, temporal sequencing of depressive
and cognitive symptoms, course of illness, and treatment response are helpful in making
this determination. The premorbid state of the individual may help to differentiate a
Major Depressive Episode from a dementia. In a dementia, there is usually a premorbid
history of declining cognitive function, whereas the individual with a Major Depressive
Episode is much more likely to have a relatively normal premorbid state and abrupt
cognitive decline associated with the depression.
Major Depressive Episodes with prominent irritable mood may be difficult to
distinguish from Manic Episodes with irritable mood or from Mixed Episodes. This
distinction requires a careful clinical evaluation of the presence of manic symptoms. If
criteria are met for both a Manic Episode and a Major Depressive Episode (except for
the 2-week duration) nearly every day for at least a 1-week period, this would constitute
a Mixed Episode.
Distractibility and low frustration tolerance can occur in both Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder and a Major Depressive Episode; if the criteria are met for
both, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder may be diagnosed in addition to the Mood
Disorder. However, the clinician must be cautious not to overdiagnose a Major
Depressive Episode in children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder whose
disturbance in mood is characterized by irritability rather than by sadness or loss of
interest.
A Major Depressive Episode that occurs in response to a psychosocial stressor is
distinguished from Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood by the fact that the
full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode are not met in Adjustment Disorder. After
the loss of a loved one, even if depressive symptoms are of sufficient duration and
number to meet criteria for a Major Depressive Episode, they should be attributed to
Bereavement rather than to a Major Depressive Episode, unless they persist for more
than 2 months or include marked functional impairment, morbid preoccupation with
worthlessness, suicidal ideation, psychotic symptoms, or psychomotor retardation.
Finally, periods of sadness are inherent aspects of the human experience. These
periods should not be diagnosed as a Major Depressive Episode unless criteria are met
for severity (i.e., five out of nine symptoms), duration (i.e., most of the day, nearly every
day for at least 2 weeks), and clinically significant distress or impairment. The diagnosis
Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified may be appropriate for presentations
of depressed mood with clinically significant impairment that do not meet criteria for
duration or severity.Major Depressive Episode
327
Criteria for Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the
same 2-week period and represent a change from previous functioning;
at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss
of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly due to a general medical
condition, or mood-incongruent delusions or hallucinations.
(1) depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated
by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad or empty) or observation
made by others (e.g., appears tearful). Note: In children and
adolescents, can be irritable mood.
(2) markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all,
activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either
subjective account or observation made by others)
(3) significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a
change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease
or increase in appetite nearly every day. Note: In children,
consider failure to make expected weight gains.
(4) insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day
(5) psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable
by others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being
slowed down)
(6) fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day
(7) feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which
may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or
guilt about being sick)
(8) diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly
every day (either by subjective account or as observed by others)
(9) recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent
suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a
specific plan for committing suicide
B. The symptoms do not meet criteria for a Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hypothyroidism).
E. The symptoms are not better accounted for by Bereavement, i.e., after
the loss of a loved one, the symptoms persist for longer than 2 months
or are characterized by marked functional impairment, morbid preoc-
cupation with worthlessness, suicidal ideation, psychotic symptoms, or
psychomotor retardation.328
Mood Disorders
Manic Episode
Episode Features
A Manic Episode is defined by a distinct period during which there is an abnormally
and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood. This period of abnormal mood
must last at least 1 week (or less if hospitalization is required) (Criterion A). The mood
disturbance must be accompanied by at least three additional symptoms from a list that
includes inflated self-esteem or grandiosity, decreased need for sleep, pressure of speech,
flight of ideas, distractibility, increased involvement in goal-directed activities or psycho
motor agitation, and excessive involvement in pleasurable activities with a high potential
for painful consequences. If the mood is irritable (rather than elevated or expansive), at
least four of the above symptoms must be present (Criterion B). The symptoms do not
meet criteria for a Mixed Episode, which is characterized by the symptoms of both a
Manic Episode and a Major Depressive Episode occurring nearly every day for at least
a 1-week period (Criterion C). The disturbance must be sufficiently severe to cause
marked impairment in social or occupational functioning or to require hospitalization,
or it is characterized by the presence of psychotic features (Criterion D). The episode
must not be due to the direct physiological effects of a drug of abuse, a medication,
other somatic treatments for depression (e.g., electroconvulsive therapy or light therapy)
or toxin exposure. The episode must also not be due to the direct physiological effects
of a general medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis, brain tumor) (Criterion E).
The elevated mood of a Manic Episode may be described as euphoric, unusually
good, cheerful, or high. Although the person's mood may initially have an infectious
quality for the uninvolved observer, it is recognized as excessive by those who know
the person well. The expansive quality of the mood is characterized by unceasing and
indiscriminate enthusiasm for interpersonal, sexual, or occupational interactions. For
example, the person may spontaneously start extensive conversations with strangers in
public places, or a salesperson may telephone strangers at home in the early morning
hours to initiate sales. Although elevated mood is considered the prototypical symptom,
the predominant mood disturbance may be irritability, particularly when the person's
wishes are thwarted. Lability of mood (e.g., the alternation between euphoria and
irritability) is frequently seen.
Inflated self-esteem is typically present, ranging from uncritical self-confidence to
marked grandiosity, and may reach delusional proportions (Criterion Bl). Individuals
may give advice on matters about which they have no special knowledge (e.g., how to
run the United Nations). Despite lack of any particular experience or talent, the individual
may embark on writing a novel or composing a symphony or seek publicity for some
impractical invention. Grandiose delusions are common (e.g., having a special relation-
ship to God or to some public figure from the political, religious, or entertainment world).
Almost invariably, there is a decreased need for sleep (Criterion B2). The person
usually awakens several hours earlier than usual, feeling full of energy. When the sleep
disturbance is severe, the person may go for days without sleep and yet not feel tired.
Manic speech is typically pressured, loud, rapid, and difficult to interrupt (Criterion
B3). Individuals may talk nonstop, sometimes for hours on end, and without regard for
others' wishes to communicate. Speech is sometimes characterized by joking, punning,
and amusing irrelevancies. The individual may become theatrical, with dramatic
mannerisms and singing. Sounds rather than meaningful conceptual relationships may
govern word choice (i.e., clanging). If the person's mood is more irritable than expansive,Manic Episode
329
speech may be marked by complaints, hostile comments, or angry tirades.
The individual's thoughts may race, often at a rate faster than can be articulated
(Criterion B4). Some individuals with Manic Episodes report that this experience
resembles watching two or three television programs simultaneously. Frequently there
is flight of ideas evidenced by a nearly continuous flow of accelerated speech, with
abrupt changes from one topic to another. For example, while talking about a potential
business deal to sell computers, a salesperson may shift to discussing in minute detail
the history of the computer chip, the industrial revolution, or applied mathematics. When
flight of ideas is severe, speech may become disorganized and incoherent.
Distractibility (Criterion B5) is evidenced by an inability to screen out irrelevant
external stimuli (e.g., the interviewer's tie, background noises or conversations, or
furnishings in the room). There may be a reduced ability to differentiate between
thoughts that are germane to the topic and thoughts that are only slightly relevant or
clearly irrelevant.
The increase in goal-directed activity often involves excessive planning of, and
excessive participation in, multiple activities (e.g., sexual, occupational, political, reli-
gious) (Criterion B6). Increased sexual drive, fantasies, and behavior are often present.
The person may simultaneously take on multiple new business ventures without regard
for the apparent risks or the need to complete each venture satisfactorily. Almost
invariably, there is increased sociability (e.g., renewing old acquaintances or calling
friends or even strangers at all hours of the day or night), without regard to the intrusive,
domineering, and demanding nature of these interactions. Individuals often display
psychomotor agitation or restlessness by pacing or by holding multiple conversations
simultaneously (e.g., by telephone and in person at the same time). Some individuals
write a torrent of letters on many different topics to friends, public figures, or the media.
Expansiveness, unwarranted optimism, grandiosity, and poor judgment often lead
to an imprudent involvement in pleasurable activities such as buying sprees, reckless
driving, foolish business investments, and sexual behavior unusual for the person, even
though these activities are likely to have painful consequences (Criterion B7). The
individual may purchase many unneeded items (e.g., 20 pairs of shoes, expensive
antiques) without the money to pay for them. Unusual sexual behavior may include
infidelity or indiscriminate sexual encounters with strangers.
The impairment resulting from the disturbance must be severe enough to cause
marked impairment in functioning or to require hospitalization to protect the individual
from the negative consequences of actions that result from poor judgment (e.g., financial
losses, illegal activities, loss of employment, assaultive behavior). By definition, the
presence of psychotic features during a Manic Episode constitutes marked impairment
in functioning (Criterion D).
Symptoms like those seen in a Manic Episode may be due to the direct effects of
antidepressant medication, electroconvulsive therapy, light therapy, or medication
prescribed for other general medical conditions (e.g., corticosteroids). Such presentations
are not considered Manic Episodes and do not count toward the diagnosis of Bipolar I
Disorder. For example, if a person with recurrent Major Depressive Disorder develops
manic symptoms following a course of antidepressant medication, the episode is
diagnosed as a Substance-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features, and there is
no switch from a diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder to Bipolar I Disorder. Some
evidence suggests that there may be a bipolar "diathesis" in individuals who develop
manic-like episodes following somatic treatment for depression. Such individuals may
have an increased likelihood of future Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episodes that are330
Mood Disorders
not related to substances or somatic treatments for depression. This may be an especially
important consideration in children and adolescents.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with a Manic
Episode frequently do not recognize that they are ill and resist efforts to be treated. They
may travel impulsively to other cities, losing contact with relatives and caretakers. They
may change their dress, makeup, or personal appearance to a more sexually suggestive
or dramatically flamboyant style that is out of character for them. They may engage in
activities that have a disorganized or bizarre quality (e.g., distributing candy, money, or
advice to passing strangers). Gambling and antisocial behaviors may accompany the
Manic Episode. Ethical concerns may be disregarded even by those who are typically
very conscientious (e.g., a stockbroker inappropriately buys and sells stock without the
clients' knowledge or permission; a scientist incorporates the findings of others). The
person may be hostile and physically threatening to others. Some individuals, especially
those with psychotic features, may become physically assaultive or suicidal. Adverse
consequences of a Manic Episode (e.g., involuntary hospitalization, difficulties with the
law, or serious financial difficulties) often result from poor judgment and hyperactivity.
When no longer in the Manic Episode, most individuals are regretful for behaviors
engaged in during the Manic Episode. Some individuals describe having a much sharper
sense of smell, hearing, or vision (e.g., colors appear very bright). When catatonic
symptoms (e.g., stupor, mutism, negativism, and posturing) are present, the specifier
With Catatonic Features may be indicated (see p. 382).
Mood may shift rapidly to anger or depression. Depressive symptoms may last
moments, hours, or, more rarely, days. Not uncommonly, the depressive symptoms and
manic symptoms occur simultaneously. If the criteria for both a Major Depressive Episode
and a Manic Episode are prominent every day for at least 1 week, the episode is
considered to be a Mixed Episode (see p. 333). As the Manic Episode develops, there
is often a substantial increase in the use of alcohol or stimulants, which may exacerbate
or prolong the episode.
Associated laboratory findings. No laboratory findings that are diagnostic of a
Manic Episode have been identified. However, a variety of laboratory findings have been
noted to be abnormal in groups of individuals with Manic Episodes compared with
control subjects. Laboratory findings in Manic Episodes include polysomnographic
abnormalities, increased cortisol secretion, and absence of dexamethasone nonsuppres-
sion. There may be abnormalities involving the norepinephrine, serotonin, acetylcholine,
dopamine, or gamma-aminobutyric acid neurotransmitter systems, as demonstrated by
studies of neurotransmitter metabolites, receptor functioning, pharmacological provoca-
tion, and neuroendocrine function.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Cultural considerations that were suggested for Major Depressive Episodes are also
relevant to Manic Episodes (see p. 324). Manic Episodes in adolescents are more likel
to include psychotic features and may be associated with school truancy, antisocial
behavior, school failure, or substance use. A significant minority of adolescents appearManic Episode
331
to have a history of long-standing behavior problems that precede the onset of a frank
Manic Episode. It is unclear whether these problems represent a prolonged prodrome
to Bipolar Disorder or an independent disorder. See the corresponding sections of the
texts for Bipolar I Disorder (p. 352) and Bipolar II Disorder (p. 360) for specific
information on gender.
Course
The mean age at onset for a first Manic Episode is the early 20s, but some cases start in
adolescence and others start after age 50 years. Manic Episodes typically begin suddenly,
with a rapid escalation of symptoms over a few days. Frequently, Manic Episodes occur
following psychosocial stressors. The episodes usually last from a few weeks to several
months and are briefer and end more abruptly than Major Depressive Episodes. In many
instances (50%-60%), a Major Depressive Episode immediately precedes or immediately
follows a Manic Episode, with no intervening period of euthymia. If the Manic Episode
occurs in the postpartum period, there may be an increased risk for recurrence in
subsequent postpartum periods and the specifier With Postpartum Onset is applicable
(see p. 386).
Differential
Diagnosis
A Manic Episode must be distinguished from a Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition. The appropriate diagnosis would be Mood Disorder Due to a
General Medical Condition if the mood disturbance is judged to be the direct physio-
logical consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis,
brain tumor, Cushing's syndrome) (see p. 366). This determination is based on the
history, laboratory findings, or physical examination. If it is judged that the manic
symptoms are not the direct physiological consequence of the general medical condition,
then the primary Mood Disorder is recorded on Axis I (e.g., Bipolar I Disorder) and the
general medical condition is recorded on Axis III (e.g., myocardial infarction). A late
onset of a first Manic Episode (e.g., after age 50 years) should alert the clinician to the
possibility of an etiological general medical condition or substance.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from a Manic Episode by
the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is
judged to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance (see p. 370). Symptoms like
those seen in a Manic Episode may be precipitated by a drug of abuse (e.g., manic
symptoms that occur only in the context of intoxication with cocaine would be diagnosed
as Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features, With Onset During Intoxica-
tion). Symptoms like those seen in a Manic Episode may also be precipitated by
antidepressant treatment such as medication, electroconvulsive therapy, or light therapy.
Such episodes are also diagnosed as Substance-Induced Mood Disorders (e.g., Amitrip-
tyline-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features; Electroconvulsive Therapy-
Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features).
Manic Episodes should be distinguished from Hypomanic Episodes. Although
Manic Episodes and Hypomanic Episodes have an identical list of characteristic
symptoms, the disturbance in Hypomanic Episodes is not sufficiently severe to cause
marked impairment in social or occupational functioning or to require hospitalization.
Some Hypomanic Episodes may evolve into full Manic Episodes.
Major Depressive Episodes with prominent irritable mood may be difficult to332
Mood Disorders
distinguish from Manic Episodes with irritable mood or from Mixed Episodes. This
determination requires a careful clinical evaluation of the presence of manic symptoms.
If criteria are met for both a Manic Episode and a Major Depressive Episode nearly every
day for at least a 1-week period, this would constitute a Mixed Episode.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and a Manic Episode are both charac-
terized by excessive activity, impulsive behavior, poor judgment, and denial of problems.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is distinguished from a Manic Episode by its
characteristic early onset (i.e., before age 7 years), chronic rather than episodic course,
lack of relatively clear onsets and offsets, and the absence of abnormally expansive or
elevated mood or psychotic features.
Criteria for Manic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or
irritable mood, lasting at least 1 week (or any duration if hospitalization
is necessary).
B. During the period of mood disturbance, three (or more) of the following
symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable) and have
been present to a significant degree:
(1) inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
(2) decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of
sleep)
(3) more talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking
(4) flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing
(5) distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or
irrelevant external stimuli)
(6) increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school,
or sexually) or psychomotor agitation
(7) excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high
potential for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained
buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business invest-
ments)
C. The symptoms do not meet criteria for a Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
D. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment
in occupational functioning or in usual social activities or relationships
with others, or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or
others, or there are psychotic features.
E. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other treatment) or a
general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
Note: Manic-like episodes that are clearly caused by somatic antidepressant
treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy, light therapy) should not
count toward a diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder.Mixed Episode
333
Mixed Episode
Episode Features
A Mixed Episode is characterized by a period of time (lasting at least 1 week) in which
the criteria are met both for a Manic Episode and for a Major Depressive Episode nearly
every day (Criterion A). The individual experiences rapidly alternating moods (sadness,
irritability, euphoria) accompanied by symptoms of a Manic Episode (see p. 328) and a
Major Depressive Episode (see p. 320). The symptom presentation frequently includes
agitation, insomnia, appetite dysregulation, psychotic features, and suicidal thinking.
The disturbance must be sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in social or
occupational functioning or to require hospitalization, or it is characterized by the
presence of psychotic features (Criterion B). The disturbance is not due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other
treatment) or a general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism) (Criterion C). Symp-
toms like those seen in a Mixed Episode may be due to the direct effects of antidepressant
medication, electroconvulsive therapy, light therapy, or medication prescribed for other
general medical conditions (e.g., corticosteroids). Such presentations are not considered
Mixed Episodes and do not count toward a diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder. For example,
if a person with recurrent Major Depressive Disorder develops a mixed symptom picture
during a course of antidepressant medication, the diagnosis of the episode is Substance-
Induced Mood Disorder, With Mixed Features, and there is no switch from a diagnosis
of Major Depressive Disorder to Bipolar I Disorder. Some evidence suggests that there
may be a bipolar "diathesis" in individuals who develop mixed-like episodes following
somatic treatment for depression. Such individuals may have an increased likelihood of
future Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episodes that are not related to substances or somatic
treatments for depression. This may be an especially important consideration in children
and adolescents.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Associated features of a
Mixed Episode are similar to those for Manic Episodes and Major Depressive Episodes.
Individuals may be disorganized in their thinking or behavior. Because individuals in
Mixed Episodes experience more dysphoria than do those in Manic Episodes, they may
be more likely to seek help.
Associated laboratory findings. Laboratory findings for Mixed Episode are not well
studied, although evidence to date suggests physiological and endocrine findings that
are similar to those found in severe Major Depressive Episodes.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Cultural considerations suggested for Major Depressive Episodes are relevant to Mixed
Episodes as well (see p. 324). Mixed episodes appear to be more common in younger
individuals and in individuals over age 60 years with Bipolar Disorder and may be more
common in males than in females.334
Mood Disorders
Course
Mixed Episodes can evolve from a Manic Episode or from a Major Depressive Episode
or may arise de novo. For example, the diagnosis would be changed from Bipolar I
Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, to Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed,
for an individual with 3 weeks of manic symptoms followed by 1 week of both manic
symptoms and depressive symptoms. Mixed episodes may last weeks to several months
and may remit to a period with few or no symptoms or evolve into a Major Depressive
Episode. It is far less common for a Mixed Episode to evolve into a Manic Episode.
Differential
Diagnosis
A Mixed Episode must be distinguished from a Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition if the mood disturbance is judged to be the direct physiological consequence
of a specific general medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis, brain tumor, Cushing's
syndrome) (see p. 366). This determination is based on the history, laboratory findings
or physical examination. If it is judged that the mixed manic and depressive symptoms
are not the direct physiological consequence of the general medical condition, then the
primary Mood Disorder is recorded on Axis I (e.g., Bipolar I Disorder) and the general
medical condition is recorded on Axis III (e.g., myocardial infarction).
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from a Mixed Episode by
the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is
judged to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance (see p. 370). Symptoms like
those seen in a Mixed Episode may be precipitated by use of a drug of abuse (e.g.,
mixed manic and depressive symptoms that occur only in the context of intoxication
with cocaine would be diagnosed as Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Mixed
Features, With Onset During Intoxication). Symptoms like those seen in a Mixed Episode
may also be precipitated by antidepressant treatment such as medication, electro-
convulsive therapy, or light therapy. Such episodes are also diagnosed as Substance-
Induced Mood Disorders (e.g., Amitriptyline-Induced Mood Disorder, With Mixed
Features; Electroconvulsive Therapy-Induced Mood Disorder, With Mixed Features).
Major Depressive Episodes with prominent irritable mood and Manic Epi-
sodes with prominent irritable mood may be difficult to distinguish from Mixed
Episodes. This determination requires a careful clinical evaluation of the simultaneous
presence of symptoms that are characteristic of both a full Manic Episode and a full
Major Depressive Episode (except for duration).
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and a Mixed Episode are both charac-
terized by excessive activity, impulsive behavior, poor judgment, and denial of problems.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is distinguished from a Mixed Episode by its
characteristic early onset (i.e., before age 7 years), chronic rather than episodic course,
lack of relatively clear onsets and offsets, and the absence of abnormally expansive or
elevated mood or psychotic features. Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder also sometimes show depressive symptoms such as low self-esteem and
frustration tolerance. If criteria are met for both, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
may be diagnosed in addition to the Mood Disorder.Hypomanic Episode
335
Criteria for Mixed Episode
A. The criteria are met both for a Manic Episode (see p. 332) and for a
Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327) (except for duration) nearly every
day during at least a 1-week period.
B. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment
in occupational functioning or in usual social activities or relationships
with others, or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or
others, or there are psychotic features.
C. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other treatment) or a
general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
Note: Mixed-like episodes that are clearly caused by somatic antidepressant
treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy, light therapy) should not
count toward a diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder.
Hypomanic Episode
Episode Features
A Hypomanic Episode is defined as a distinct period during which there is an abnormally
and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood that lasts at least 4 days
(Criterion A). This period of abnormal mood must be accompanied by at least three
additional symptoms from a list that includes inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
(nondelusional), decreased need for sleep, pressure of speech, flight of ideas, distract-
ibility, increased involvement in goal-directed activities or psychomotor agitation, and
excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high potential for painful
consequences (Criterion B). If the mood is irritable rather than elevated or expansive,
at least four of the above symptoms must be present. This list of additional symptoms
is identical to those that define a Manic Episode (see p. 328) except that delusions or
hallucinations cannot be present. The mood during a Hypomanic Episode must be clearly
different from the individual's usual nondepressed mood, and there must be a clear
change in functioning that is not characteristic of the individual's usual functioning
(Criterion C). Because the changes in mood and functioning must be observable by
others (Criterion D), the evaluation of this criterion will often require interviewing other
informants (e.g., family members). History from other informants is particularly important
in the evaluation of adolescents. In contrast to a Manic Episode, a Hypomanic Episode
is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupational functioning
or to require hospitalization, and there are no psychotic features (Criterion E). The
change in functioning for some individuals may take the form of a marked increase in
efficiency, accomplishments, or creativity. However, for others, hypomania can cause
some social or occupational impairment.
The mood disturbance and other symptoms must not be due to the direct336
Mood Disorders
physiological effects of a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment for depression
(electroconvulsive therapy or light therapy), or toxin exposure. The episode must also
not be due to the direct physiological effects of a general medical condition (e.g., multiple
sclerosis, brain tumor) (Criterion F). Symptoms like those seen in a Hypomanic Episode
may be due to the direct effects of antidepressant medication, electroconvulsive therapy,
light therapy, or medication prescribed for other general medical conditions (e.g.,
corticosteroids). Such presentations are not considered Hypomanic Episodes and do not
count toward the diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder. For example, if a person with recurrent
Major Depressive Disorder develops symptoms of a hypomanic-like episode during a
course of antidepressant medication, the episode is diagnosed as a Substance-Induced
Mood Disorder, With Manic Features, and there is no switch from a diagnosis of Major
Depressive Disorder to Bipolar II Disorder. Some evidence suggests that there may be
a bipolar "diathesis" in individuals who develop manic- or hypomanic-like episodes
following somatic treatment for depression. Such individuals may have an increased
likelihood of future Manic or Hypomanic Episodes that are not related to substances or
somatic treatments for depression.
The elevated mood in a Hypomanic Episode is described as euphoric, unusually
good, cheerful, or high. Although the person's mood may have an infectious quality for
the uninvolved observer, it is recognized as a distinct change from the usual self by
those who know the person well. The expansive quality of the mood disturbance is
characterized by enthusiasm for social, interpersonal, or occupational interactions.
Although elevated mood is considered prototypical, the mood disturbance may be
irritable or may alternate between euphoria and irritability. Characteristically, inflated
self-esteem, usually at the level of uncritical self-confidence rather than marked
grandiosity, is present (Criterion Bl). There is very often a decreased need for sleep
(Criterion B2); the person awakens before the usual time with increased energy. The
speech of a person with a Hypomanic Episode is often somewhat louder and more rapid
than usual, but is not typically difficult to interrupt. It may be full of jokes, puns, plays
on words, and irrelevancies (Criterion B3). Flight of ideas is uncommon and, if present,
lasts for very brief periods (Criterion B4).
Distractibility is often present, as evidenced by rapid changes in speech or activity
as a result of responding to various irrelevant external stimuli (Criterion B5). The increase
in goal-directed activity may involve planning of, and participation in, multiple activities
(Criterion B6). These activities are often creative and productive (e.g., writing a letter to
the editor, clearing up paperwork). Sociability is usually increased, and there may be
an increase in sexual activity. There may be impulsive activity such as buying sprees,
reckless driving, or foolish business investments (Criterion B7). However, such activities
are usually organized, are not bizarre, and do not result in the level of impairment that
is characteristic of a Manic Episode.
Specific Culture and Age Features
Cultural considerations that were suggested for Major Depressive Episodes are relevant
to Hypomanic Episodes as well (see p. 324). In younger (e.g., adolescent) persons,
Hypomanic Episodes may be associated with school truancy, antisocial behavior, school
failure, or substance use.Hypomanic Episode
337
Course
A Hypomanic Episode typically begins suddenly, with a rapid escalation of symptoms
within a day or two. Episodes may last for several weeks to months and are usually
more abrupt in onset and briefer than Major Depressive Episodes. In many cases, the
Hypomanic Episode may be preceded or followed by a Major Depressive Episode.
Studies suggest that 5%-15% of individuals with hypomania will ultimately develop a
Manic Episode.
Differential
Diagnosis
A Hypomanic Episode must be distinguished from a Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition if the mood disturbance is judged to be the direct physiological consequence
of a specific general medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis, brain tumor, Cushing's
syndrome) (see p. 366). This determination is based on the history, laboratory findings,
or physical examination. If it is judged that the hypomanic symptoms are not the direct
physiological consequence of the general medical condition, then the primary Mood
Disorder is recorded on Axis I (e.g., Bipolar II Disorder) and the general medical
condition is recorded on Axis III (e.g., myocardial infarction).
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from a Hypomanic Episode
by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin)
is judged to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance (see p. 370). Symptoms
like those seen in a Hypomanic Episode may be precipitated by a drug of abuse (e.g.,
hypomanic symptoms that occur only in the context of intoxication with cocaine would
be diagnosed as Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features, With Onset
During Intoxication). Symptoms like those seen in a Hypomanic Episode may also be
precipitated by antidepressant treatment such as medication, electroconvulsive therapy,
or light therapy. Such episodes are also diagnosed as Substance-Induced Mood Disorders
(e.g., Amitriptyline-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features; Electroconvulsive
Therapy-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features).
Manic Episodes should be distinguished from Hypomanic Episodes. Although
Manic Episodes and Hypomanic Episodes have identical lists of characteristic symptoms,
the mood disturbance in Hypomanic Episodes is not sufficiently severe to cause marked
impairment in social or occupational functioning or to require hospitalization. Some
Hypomanic Episodes may evolve into full Manic Episodes.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and a Hypomanic Episode are both
characterized by excessive activity, impulsive behavior, poor judgment, and denial of
problems. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is distinguished from a Hypomanic
Episode by its characteristic early onset (i.e., before age 7 years), chronic rather than
episodic course, lack of relatively clear onsets and offsets, and the absence of abnormally
expansive or elevated mood.
A Hypomanic Episode must be distinguished from euthymia, particularly in
individuals who have been chronically depressed and are unaccustomed to the
experience of a nondepressed mood state.338
Mood Disorders
Criteria for Hypomanic Episode
A. A distinct period of persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood,
lasting throughout at least 4 days, that is clearly different from the usual
nondepressed mood.
B. During the period of mood disturbance, three (or more) of the following
symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable) and have
been present to a significant degree:
(1) inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
(2) decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of
sleep)
(3) more talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking
(4) flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing
(5) distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or
irrelevant external stimuli)
(6) increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school,
or sexually) or psychomotor agitation
(7) excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high
potential for painful consequences (e.g., the person engages in
unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish busi-
ness investments)
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning
that is uncharacteristic of the person when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable
by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social
or occupational functioning, or to necessitate hospitalization, and there
are no psychotic features.
F. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other treatment) or a
general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
Note: Hypomanic-like episodes that are clearly caused by somatic antidepressant
treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy, light therapy) should not
count toward a diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder.Major Depressive Disorder
339
Depressive Disorder
Major Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Major Depressive Disorder is a clinical course that is character-
ized by one or more Major Depressive Episodes (see p. 320) without a history of Manic,
Mixed, or Hypomanic Episodes (Criteria A and C). Episodes of Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder (due to the direct physiological effects of a drug of abuse, a medication, or
toxin exposure) or of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition do not count
toward a diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder. In addition, the episodes must not be
better accounted for by Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizo-
phrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified (Criterion B).
The fourth digit in the diagnostic code for Major Depressive Disorder indicates
whether it is a Single Episode (used only for first episodes) or Recurrent. It is sometimes
difficult to distinguish between a single episode with waxing and waning symptoms and
two separate episodes. For purposes of this manual, an episode is considered to have
ended when the full criteria for the Major Depressive Episode have not been met for at
least 2 consecutive months. During this 2-month period, there is either complete
resolution of symptoms or the presence of depressive symptoms that no longer meet
the full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode (In Partial Remission).
The fifth digit in the diagnostic code for Major Depressive Disorder indicates the
current state of the disturbance. If the criteria for a Major Depressive Episode are met,
the severity of the episode is noted as Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features,
or Severe With Psychotic Features. If the criteria for a Major Depressive Episode are not
currently met, the fifth digit is used to indicate whether the disorder is In Partial Remission
or In Full Remission (see p. 377).
If Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episodes develop in the course of Major Depressive
Disorder, the diagnosis is changed to a Bipolar Disorder. However, if manic or
hypomanic symptoms occur as a direct effect of antidepressant treatment, use of other
medications, substance use, or toxin exposure, the diagnosis of Major Depressive
Disorder remains appropriate and an additional diagnosis of Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder, With Manic Features (or With Mixed Features), should be noted. Similarly, if
manic or hypomanic symptoms occur as a direct effect of a general medical condition,
the diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder remains appropriate and an additional
diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, With Manic Features
(or With Mixed Features), should be noted.
Specifiers
The following specifiers may be used to describe the current Major Depressive Episode
(or, if criteria are not currently met for a Major Depressive Episode, the most recent
Major Depressive Episode):
Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features, Severe With Psychotic
Features, In Partial Remission, In Full Remission (see p. 376)340
Mood Disorders
Chronic (see p. 382)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (see p. 383)
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)
The following specifiers may be used to indicate the pattern of the episodes and
the presence of interepisode symptomatology for Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With or Without Full Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (see p. 389)
Recording Procedures
The diagnostic codes for Major Depressive Disorder are selected as follows:
1. The first three digits are 296.
2. The fourth digit is either 2 (if there is only a single Major Depressive Episode)
or 3 (if there are recurrent Major Depressive Episodes).
3. The fifth digit indicates the following: 1 for Mild severity, 2 for Moderate severity,
3 for Severe Without Psychotic Features, 4 for Severe With Psychotic Features,
5 for In Partial Remission, 6 for In Full Remission, and 0 if Unspecified. Other
specifiers for Major Depressive Disorder cannot be coded.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order:
Major Depressive Disorder, specifiers coded in the fourth digit (e.g., Recurrent), specifiers
coded in the fifth digit (e.g., Mild, Severe With Psychotic Features, In Partial Remission),
as many specifiers (without codes) as apply to the most recent episode (e.g., With
Melancholic Features, With Postpartum Onset), and as many specifiers (without codes)
as apply to the course of episodes (e.g., With Full Interepisode Recovery); for example,
296.32 Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Moderate, With Atypical Features, With
Seasonal Pattern, With Full Interepisode Recovery.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Major Depressive Disor-
der is associated with high mortality. Up to 15% of individuals with severe Major
Depressive Disorder die by suicide. Epidemiological evidence also suggests that there
is a fourfold increase in death rates in individuals with Major Depressive Disorder who
are over age 55 years. Individuals with Major Depressive Disorder admitted to nursing
homes may have a markedly increased likelihood of death in the first year. Among
individuals seen in general medical settings, those with Major Depressive Disorder have
more pain and physical illness and decreased physical, social, and role functioning.
Major Depressive Disorder may be preceded by Dysthymic Disorder (10% in
epidemiological samples and 15%-25% in clinical samples). It is also estimated that each
year approximately 10% of individuals with Dysthymic Disorder alone will go on to have
a first Major Depressive Episode. Other mental disorders frequently co-occur with Major
Depressive Disorder (e.g., Substance-Related Disorders, Panic Disorder, Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder, Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, Borderline Personality Disorder).Major Depressive Disorder
341
Associated laboratory findings. The laboratory abnormalities that are associated
with Major Depressive Disorder are those associated with Major Depressive Episode (see
p. 323). None of these findings are diagnostic of Major Depressive Disorder, but they
have been noted to be abnormal in groups of individuals with Major Depressive Disorder
compared with control subjects. Most laboratory abnormalities are state dependent (i.e.,
are present only when depressive symptoms are present). However, evidence suggests
that some sleep EEG abnormalities persist into clinical remission or may precede the
onset of the Major Depressive Episode.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Major Depressive Disorder may be associated with chronic general medical conditions.
Up to 20%-25% of individuals with certain general medical conditions (e.g., diabetes,
myocardial infarction, carcinomas, stroke) will develop Major Depressive Disorder
during the course of their general medical condition. The management of the general
medical condition is more complex and the prognosis is less favorable if Major
Depressive Disorder is present.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Specific culture-related features are discussed in the text for Major Depressive Episode
(see p. 324). Major Depressive Disorder (Single or Recurrent) is twice as common in
adolescent and adult females as in adolescent and adult males. In prepubertal children,
boys and girls are equally affected. Rates in men and women are highest in the 25- to
44-year-old age group, whereas rates are lower for both men and women over age
65 years.
Prevalence
Studies of Major Depressive Disorder have reported a wide range of values for the
proportion of the adult population with the disorder. The lifetime risk for Major
Depressive Disorder in community samples has varied from 10% to 25% for women and
from 5% to 12% for men. The point prevalence of Major Depressive Disorder in adults
in community samples has varied from 5% to 9% for women and from 2% to 3% for
men. The prevalence rates for Major Depressive Disorder appear to be unrelated to
ethnicity, education, income, or marital status.
Course
Major Depressive Disorder may begin at any age, with an average age at onset in the
mid-20s. Epidemiological data suggest that the age at onset is decreasing for those born
more recently. The course of Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, is variable. Some
people have isolated episodes that are separated by many years without any depressive
symptoms, whereas others have clusters of episodes, and still others have increasingly
frequent episodes as they grow older. Some evidence suggests that the periods of
remission generally last longer early in the course of the disorder. The number of prior
episodes predicts the likelihood of developing a subsequent Major Depressive Episode.
Approximately 50%-60% of individuals with Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode,
can be expected to have a second episode. Individuals who have had two episodes342
Mood Disorders
have a 70% chance of having a third, and individuals who have had three episodes have
a 90% chance of having a fourth. About 5%-10% of individuals with Major Depressive
Disorder, Single Episode, subsequently develop a Manic Episode (i.e., develop Bipolar I
Disorder).
Major Depressive Episodes may end completely (in about two-thirds of cases), or
only partially or not at all (in about one-third of cases). For individuals who have only
partial remission, there is a greater likelihood of developing additional episodes and of
continuing the pattern of partial interepisode recovery. The longitudinal course specifiers
With Full Interepisode Recovery and Without Full Interepisode Recovery (see p. 387)
may therefore have prognostic value. A number of individuals have preexisting
Dysthymic Disorder prior to the onset of Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode.
Some evidence suggests that these individuals are more likely to have additional Major
Depressive Episodes, have poorer interepisode recovery, and may require additional
acute-phase treatment and a longer period of continuing treatment to attain and maintain
a more thorough and longer-lasting euthymic state.
Follow-up naturalistic studies suggested that 1 year after the diagnosis of a Major
Depressive Episode, 40% of individuals still have symptoms that are sufficiently severe
to meet criteria for a full Major Depressive Episode, roughly 20% continue to have some
symptoms that no longer meet full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode (i.e., Major
Depressive Disorder, In Partial Remission), and 40% have no Mood Disorder. The severity
of the initial Major Depressive Episode appears to predict persistence. Chronic general
medical conditions are also a risk factor for more persistent episodes.
Episodes of Major Depressive Disorder often follow a severe psychosocial stressor,
such as the death of a loved one or divorce. Studies suggest that psychosocial events
(stressors) may play a more significant role in the precipitation of the first or second
episodes of Major Depressive Disorder and may play less of a role in the onset of
subsequent episodes. Chronic general medical conditions and Substance Dependence
(particularly Alcohol or Cocaine Dependence) may contribute to the onset or exacerba-
tion of Major Depressive Disorder.
It is difficult to predict whether the first episode of a Major Depressive Disorder in
a young person will ultimately evolve into a Bipolar Disorder. Some data suggest that
the acute onset of severe depression, especially with psychotic features and psychomotor
retardation, in a young person without prepubertal psychopathology is more likely to
predict a bipolar course. A family history of Bipolar Disorder may also be suggestive of
subsequent development of Bipolar Disorder.
Familial Pattern
Major Depressive Disorder is 1.5-3 times more common among first-degree biological
relatives of persons with this disorder than among the general population. There is
evidence for an increased risk of Alcohol Dependence in adult first-degree biological
relatives, and there may be an increased incidence of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder in the children of adults with this disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
See the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Major Depressive Episode (p. 325). A history
of a Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode precludes the diagnosis of MajorMajor Depressive Disorder
343
Depressive Disorder. The presence of Hypomanic Episodes (without any history of
Manic Episodes) indicates a diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder. The presence of Manic or
Mixed Episodes (with or without Hypomanic Episodes) indicates a diagnosis of Bipolar I
Disorder.
Major Depressive Episodes in Major Depressive Disorder must be distinguished from
a Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Mood
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition if the mood disturbance is judged to be
the direct physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g.,
multiple sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism) (see p. 366). This determination is based on
the history, laboratory findings, or physical examination. If it is judged that the depressive
symptoms are not the direct physiological consequence of the general medical condition,
then the primary Mood Disorder is recorded on Axis I (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder)
and the general medical condition is recorded on Axis III (e.g., myocardial infarction).
This would be the case, for example, if the Major Depressive Episode is considered to
be the psychological consequence of having the general medical condition or if there
is no etiological relationship between the Major Depressive Episode and the general
medical condition.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from Major Depressive
Episodes in Major Depressive Disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the mood
disturbance (see p. 370). For example, depressed mood that occurs only in the context
of withdrawal from cocaine would be diagnosed as Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder,
With Depressive Features, With Onset During Withdrawal.
Dysthymic Disorder and Major Depressive Disorder are differentiated based on
severity, chronicity, and persistence. In Major Depressive Disorder, the depressed mood
must be present for most of the day, nearly every day, for a period of at least 2 weeks,
whereas Dysthymic Disorder must be present for more days than not over a period of
at least 2 years. The differential diagnosis between Dysthymic Disorder and Major
Depressive Disorder is made particularly difficult by the fact that the two disorders share
similar symptoms and that the differences between them in onset, duration, persistence,
and severity are not easy to evaluate retrospectively. Usually Major Depressive Disorder
consists of one or more discrete Major Depressive Episodes that can be distinguished
from the person's usual functioning, whereas Dysthymic Disorder is characterized by
chronic, less severe depressive symptoms that have been present for many years. If the
initial onset of chronic depressive symptoms is of sufficient severity and number to meet
criteria for a Major Depressive Episode, the diagnosis would be Major Depressive
Disorder, Chronic (if the criteria are still met), or Major Depressive Disorder, In Partial
Remission (if the criteria are no longer met). The diagnosis of Dysthymic Disorder is
made following Major Depressive Disorder only if the Dysthymic Disorder was estab-
lished prior to the first Major Depressive Episode (i.e., no Major Depressive Episodes
during the first 2 years of dysthymic symptoms), or if there has been a full remission of
the Major Depressive Episode (i.e., lasting at least 2 months) before the onset of the
Dysthymic Disorder.
Schizoaffective Disorder differs from Major Depressive Disorder, With Psychotic
Features, by the requirement that in Schizoaffective Disorder there must be at least
2 weeks of delusions or hallucinations occurring in the absence of prominent mood
symptoms. Depressive symptoms may be present during Schizophrenia, Delusional
Disorder, and Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. Most commonly, such
depressive symptoms can be considered associated features of these disorders and do344
Mood Disorders
not merit a separate diagnosis. However, when the depressive symptoms meet full
criteria for a Major Depressive Episode (or are of particular clinical significance), a
diagnosis of Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified may be made in addition to
the diagnosis of Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not Other-
wise Specified. Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type, may be difficult to distinguish from Major
Depressive Disorder, With Catatonic Features. Prior history or family history may be
helpful in making this distinction.
In elderly individuals, it is often difficult to determine whether cognitive symptoms
(e.g., disorientation, apathy, difficulty concentrating, memory loss) are better accounted
for by a dementia or by a Major Depressive Episode in Major Depressive Disorder.
This differential diagnosis may be informed by a thorough general medical evaluation
and consideration of the onset of the disturbance, temporal sequencing of depressive
and cognitive symptoms, course of illness, and treatment response. The premorbid state
of the individual may help to differentiate a Major Depressive Disorder from dementia.
In dementia, there is usually a premorbid history of declining cognitive function,
whereas the individual with Major Depressive Disorder is much more likely to have a
relatively normal premorbid state and abrupt cognitive decline associated with the
depression.
I Diagnostic criteria for 296.2x Major Depressive
Disorder, Single Episode
A. Presence of a single Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327).
B. The Major Depressive Episode is not better accounted for by Schizoaffec-
tive Disorder and is not superimposed on Schizophrenia, Schizophreni-
form Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified.
C. There has never been a Manic Episode (see p. 332), a Mixed Episode
(see p. 335), or a Hypomanic Episode (see p. 338). Note: This exclusion
does not apply if all of the manic-like, mixed-like, or hypomanic-like
episodes are substance or treatment induced or are due to the direct
physiological effects of a general medical condition.
Specify (for current or most recent episode):
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers (see p. 376)
Chronic (see p. 382)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (see p. 383)
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)300.4 Dysthymic Disorder
345
I Diagnostic criteria for 296.3x Major Depressive
Disorder, Recurrent
A. Presence of two or more Major Depressive Episodes (see p. 327).
Note: To be considered separate episodes, there must be an interval of at least
2 consecutive months in which criteria are not met for a Major Depressive
Episode.
B. The Major Depressive Episodes are not better accounted for by
Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified.
C. There has never been a Manic Episode (see p. 332), a Mixed Episode
(see p. 335), or a Hypomanic Episode (see p. 338). Note: This exclusion
does not apply if all of the manic-like, mixed-like, or hypomanic-like
episodes are substance or treatment induced or are due to the direct
physiological effects of a general medical condition.
Specify (for current or most recent episode):
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers (see p. 376)
Chronic (see p. 382)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (see p. 383)
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)
Specify:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (see p. 389)
300.4 Dysthymic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Dysthymic Disorder is a chronically depressed mood that occurs
for most of the day more days than not for at least 2 years (Criterion A). Individuals with
Dysthymic Disorder describe their mood as sad or "down in the dumps." In children,
the mood may be irritable rather than depressed, and the required minimum duration
is only 1 year. During periods of depressed mood, at least two of the following additional
symptoms are present: poor appetite or overeating, insomnia or hypersomnia, low
energy or fatigue, low self-esteem, poor concentration or difficulty making decisions,
and feelings of hopelessness (Criterion B). Individuals may note the prominent presence
of low interest and self-criticism, often seeing themselves as uninteresting or incapable.
Because these symptoms have become so much a part of the individual's day-to-day346
Mood Disorders
experience (e.g., "I've always been this way," "That's just how I am"), they are often not
reported unless directly asked about by the interviewer.
During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents), any symptom-free
intervals last no longer than 2 months (Criterion C). The diagnosis of Dysthymic Disorder
can be made only if the initial 2-year period of dysthymic symptoms is free of Major
Depressive Episodes (Criterion D). If the chronic depressive symptoms include a Major
Depressive Episode during the initial 2 years, then the diagnosis is Major Depressive
Disorder, Chronic (if full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode are met), or Major
Depressive Disorder, In Partial Remission (if full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode
are not currently met). After the initial 2 years of the Dysthymic Disorder, Major
Depressive Episodes may be superimposed on the Dysthymic Disorder. In such cases
("double depression"), both Major Depressive Disorder and Dysthymic Disorder are
diagnosed. Once the person returns to a dysthymic baseline (i.e., criteria for a Major
Depressive Episode are no longer met but dysthymic symptoms persist), only Dysthymic
Disorder is diagnosed.
The diagnosis of Dysthymic Disorder is not made if the individual has ever had a
Manic Episode (p. 328), a Mixed Episode (p. 333), or a Hypomanic Episode (p. 335) or
if criteria have ever been met for Cyclothymic Disorder (Criterion E). A separate diagnosis
of Dysthymic Disorder is not made if the depressive symptoms occur exclusively during
the course of a chronic Psychotic Disorder, such as Schizophrenia or Delusional Disorder
(Criterion F), in which case they are regarded as associated features of these disorders.
Dysthymic Disorder is also not diagnosed if the disturbance is due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., alcohol, antihypertensive medications) or a
general medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism, Alzheimer's disease) (Criterion G). The
symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational
(or academic), or other important areas of functioning (Criterion H).
Specifiers
Age at onset and the characteristic pattern of symptoms in Dysthymic Disorder may be
indicated by using the following specifiers:
Early Onset. This specifier should be used if the onset of the dysthymic
symptoms occurs before age 21 years. Such individuals are more likely to develop
subsequent Major Depressive Episodes.
Late Onset. This specifier should be used if the onset of the dysthymic
symptoms occurs at age 21 or older.
With Atypical Features. This specifier should be used if the pattern of
symptoms during the most recent 2 years of the disorder meets the criteria for
With Atypical Features (see p. 384).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. The associated features of
Dysthymic Disorder are similar to those for a Major Depressive Episode (p. 323). Several
studies suggest that the most commonly encountered symptoms in Dysthymic Disorder
may be feelings of inadequacy; generalized loss of interest or pleasure; social withdrawal;
feelings of guilt or brooding about the past; subjective feelings of irritability or excessive
anger; and decreased activity, effectiveness, or productivity. (Appendix B provides an
alternative for Criterion B for use in research studies that includes these items.) In300.4 Dysthymic Disorder
347
individuals with Dysthymic Disorder, vegetative symptoms (e.g., sleep, appetite, weight
change, and psychomotor symptoms) appear to be less common than for persons in a
Major Depressive Episode. When Dysthymic Disorder without prior Major Depressive
Disorder is present, it is a risk factor for developing Major Depressive Disorder (10% of
individuals with Dysthymic Disorder will develop Major Depressive Disorder over the
next year). Dysthymic Disorder may be associated with Borderline, Histrionic, Narcis-
sistic, Avoidant, and Dependent Personality Disorders. However, the assessment of
features of a Personality Disorder is difficult in such individuals because chronic mood
symptoms may contribute to interpersonal problems or be associated with distorted
self-perception. Other chronic Axis I disorders (e.g., Substance Dependence) or chronic
psychosocial stressors may be associated with Dysthymic Disorder in adults. In children,
Dysthymic Disorder may be associated with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,
Conduct Disorder, Anxiety Disorders, Learning Disorders, and Mental Retardation.
Associated laboratory findings. About 25%-50% of adults with Dysthymic Disorder
have some of the same polysomnographic features that are found in some individuals
with Major Depressive Disorder (e.g., reduced rapid eye movement (REM) latency,
increased REM density, reduced slow-wave sleep, impaired sleep continuity). Those
individuals with polysomnographic abnormalities more often have a positive family
history for Major Depressive Disorder (and may respond better to antidepressant
medications) than those with Dysthymic Disorder without such findings. Whether
polysomnographic abnormalities are also found in those with "pure" Dysthymic Disorder
(i.e., those with no prior history of Major Depressive Episodes) is not clear. Dexameth-
asone nonsuppression in Dysthymic Disorder is not common, unless criteria are also
met for a Major Depressive Episode.
Specific Age and Gender Features
In children, Dysthymic Disorder seems to occur equally in both sexes and often results
in impaired school performance and social interaction. Children and adolescents with
Dysthymic Disorder are usually irritable and cranky as well as depressed. They have
low self-esteem and poor social skills and are pessimistic. In adulthood, women are two
to three times more likely to develop Dysthymic Disorder than are men.
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of Dysthymic Disorder (with or without superimposed Major
Depressive Disorder) is approximately 6%. The point prevalence of Dysthymic Disorder
is approximately 3%.
Course
Dysthymic Disorder often has an early and insidious onset (i.e., in childhood, adoles-
cence, or early adult life) as well as a chronic course. In clinical settings, individuals
with Dysthymic Disorder usually have superimposed Major Depressive Disorder, which
is often the reason for seeking treatment. If Dysthymic Disorder precedes the onset of
Major Depressive Disorder, there is less likelihood that there will be spontaneous full
interepisode recovery between Major Depressive Episodes and a greater likelihood of
having more frequent subsequent episodes.348
Mood Disorders
Familial Pattern
Dysthymic Disorder is more common among first-degree biological relatives of people
with Major Depressive Disorder than among the general population.
Differential Diagnosis
See the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Major Depressive Disorder (p. 342). The
differential diagnosis between Dysthymic Disorder and Major Depressive Disorder is
made particularly difficult by the facts that the two disorders share similar symptoms
and that the differences between them in onset, duration, persistence, and severity are
not easy to evaluate retrospectively. Usually Major Depressive Disorder consists of one
or more discrete Major Depressive Episodes that can be distinguished from the person's
usual functioning, whereas Dysthymic Disorder is characterized by chronic, less severe
depressive symptoms that have been present for many years. When Dysthymic Disorder
is of many years' duration, the mood disturbance may not be easily distinguished from
the person's "usual" functioning. If the initial onset of chronic depressive symptoms is
of sufficient severity and number to meet full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode,
the diagnosis would be Major Depressive Disorder, Chronic (if the full criteria are still
met), or Major Depressive Disorder, In Partial Remission (if the full criteria are no longer
met). The diagnosis of Dysthymic Disorder can be made following Major Depressive
Disorder only if the Dysthymic Disorder was established prior to the first Major
Depressive Episode (i.e., no Major Depressive Episodes during the first 2 years of
dysthymic symptoms), or if there has been a full remission of the Major Depressive
Disorder (i.e., lasting at least 2 months) before the onset of the Dysthymic Disorder.
Depressive symptoms may be a common associated feature of chronic Psychotic
Disorders (e.g., Schizoaffective Disorder, Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder). A sep-
arate diagnosis of Dysthymic Disorder is not made if the symptoms occur only during
the course of the Psychotic Disorder (including residual phases).
Dysthymic Disorder must be distinguished from a Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition, With Depressive Features, if the mood disturbance is judged to be the direct
physiological consequence of a specific, usually chronic, general medical condition (e.g.,
multiple sclerosis) (see p. 366). This determination is based on the history, laboratory
findings, or physical examination. If it is judged that the depressive symptoms are not
the direct physiological consequence of the general medical condition, then the primary
Mood Disorder is recorded on Axis I (e.g., Dysthymic Disorder) and the general medical
condition is recorded on Axis III (e.g., diabetes mellitus). This would be the case, for
example, if the depressive symptoms are considered to be the psychological conse-
quence of having a chronic general medical condition or if there is no etiological
relationship between the depressive symptoms and the general medical condition. A
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from a Dysthymic Disorder by
the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is
judged to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance (see p. 370).
Often there is evidence of a coexisting personality disturbance. When an
individual's presentation meets the criteria for both Dysthymic Disorder and a Personality
Disorder, both diagnoses are given.300.4 Dysthymic Disorder
349
I Diagnostic criteria for 300.4 Dysthymic Disorder
A. Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as
indicated either by subjective account or observation by others, for at
least 2 years. Note: In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable
and duration must be at least 1 year.
B. Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:
(1) poor appetite or overeating
(2) insomnia or hypersomnia
(3) low energy or fatigue
(4) low self-esteem
(5) poor concentration or difficulty making decisions
(6) feelings of hopelessness
C. During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the
disturbance, the person has never been without the symptoms in
Criteria A and B for more than 2 months at a time.
D. No Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327) has been present during the
first 2 years of the disturbance (1 year for children and adolescents); i.e.,
the disturbance is not better accounted for by chronic Major Depressive
Disorder, or Major Depressive Disorder, In Partial Remission.
Note: There may have been a previous Major Depressive Episode provided
there was a full remission (no significant signs or symptoms for 2 months) before
development of the Dysthymic Disorder. In addition, after the initial 2 years
(1 year in children or adolescents) of Dysthymic Disorder, there may be
superimposed episodes of Major Depressive Disorder, in which case both
diagnoses may be given when the criteria are met for a Major Depressive Episode.
E. There has never been a Manic Episode (see p. 332), a Mixed Episode
(see p. 335), or a Hypomanic Episode (see p. 338), and criteria have
never been met for Cyclothymic Disorder.
F. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
chronic Psychotic Disorder, such as Schizophrenia or Delusional Disorder.
G. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hypothyroidism).
H. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
Early Onset: if onset is before age 21 years
Late Onset: if onset is age 21 years or older
Specify (for most recent 2 years of Dysthymic Disorder):
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)350
Mood Disorders
311 Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category includes disorders with
depressive features that do not meet the criteria for Major Depressive Disorder,
Dysthymic Disorder, Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood (see p. 623), or
Adjustment Disorder With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood (see p. 624). Sometimes
depressive symptoms can present as part of an Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
(see p. 444). Examples of Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified include
1. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder: in most menstrual cycles during the past year,
symptoms (e.g., markedly depressed mood, marked anxiety, marked affective
lability, decreased interest in activities) regularly occurred during the last week
of the luteal phase (and remitted within a few days of the onset of menses).
These symptoms must be severe enough to markedly interfere with work, school,
or usual activities and be entirely absent for at least 1 week postmenses (see
p. 715 for suggested research criteria).
2. Minor depressive disorder: episodes of at least 2 weeks of depressive symptoms
but with fewer than the five items required for Major Depressive Disorder (see
p. 719 for suggested research criteria).
3. Recurrent brief depressive disorder: depressive episodes lasting from 2 days up
to 2 weeks, occurring at least once a month for 12 months (not associated with
the menstrual cycle) (see p. 721 for suggested research criteria).
4. Postpsychotic depressive disorder of Schizophrenia: a Major Depressive Episode
that occurs during the residual phase of Schizophrenia (see p. 711 for suggested
research criteria).
5. A Major Depressive Episode superimposed on Delusional Disorder, Psychotic
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified, or the active phase of Schizophrenia.
6. Situations in which the clinician has concluded that a depressive disorder is
present but is unable to determine whether it is primary, due to a general medical
condition, or substance induced.
Bipolar Disorders
This section includes Bipolar I Disorder, Bipolar II Disorder, Cyclothymia, and Bipolar
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. There are six separate criteria sets for Bipolar I
Disorder: Single Manic Episode, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic, Most Recent Episode
Manic, Most Recent Episode Mixed, Most Recent Episode Depressed, and Most Recent
Episode Unspecified. Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, is used to describe
individuals who are having a first episode of mania. The remaining criteria sets are used
to specify the nature of the current (or most recent) episode in individuals who have
had recurrent mood episodes.
Bipolar I Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Bipolar I Disorder is a clinical course that is characterized by
the occurrence of one or more Manic Episodes (see p. 328) or Mixed Episodes (seeBipolar I Disorder
351
p. 333). Often individuals have also had one or more Major Depressive Episodes (see
p. 320). Episodes of Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (due to the direct effects of a
medication, other somatic treatments for depression, a drug of abuse, or toxin exposure)
or of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition do not count toward a diagnosis
of Bipolar I Disorder. In addition, the episodes are not better accounted for by
Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform
Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. Bipolar
I Disorder is subclassified in the fourth digit of the code according to whether the
individual is experiencing a first episode (i.e., Single Manic Episode) or whether the
disorder is recurrent. Recurrence is indicated by either a shift in the polarity of the episode
or an interval between episodes of at least 2 months without manic symptoms. A shift
in polarity is defined as a clinical course in which a Major Depressive Episode evolves
into a Manic Episode or a Mixed Episode or in which a Manic Episode or a Mixed Episode
evolves into a Major Depressive Episode. In contrast, a Hypomanic Episode that evolves
into a Manic Episode or a Mixed Episode, or a Manic Episode that evolves into a Mixed
Episode (or vice versa), is considered to be only a single episode. For recurrent Bipolar
I Disorders, the nature of the current (or most recent) episode can be specified (Most
Recent Episode Hypomanic, Most Recent Episode Manic, Most Recent Episode Mixed,
Most Recent Episode Depressed, Most Recent Episode Unspecified).
Specifiers
The following specifiers for Bipolar I Disorder can be used to describe the current Manic,
Mixed, or Major Depressive Episode (or, if criteria are not currently met for a Manic,
Mixed, or Major Depressive Episode, the most recent Manic, Mixed, or Major Depressive
Episode):
Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features, Severe With Psychotic
Features, In Partial Remission, In Full Remission (see p. 376)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)
The following specifiers apply only to the current (or most recent) Major Depressive
Episode only if it is the most recent type of mood episode:
Chronic (see p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (see p. 383)
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)
The following specifiers can be used to indicate the pattern of episodes:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With or Without Full Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)
Recording Procedures
The diagnostic codes for Bipolar I Disorder are selected as follows:
1. The first three digits are 296.352
Mood Disorders
2. The fourth digit is 0 if there is a single Manic Episode. For recurrent episodes,
the fourth digit is 4 if the current or most recent episode is a Hypomanic Episode
or a Manic Episode, 6 if it is a Mixed Episode, 5 if it is a Major Depressive Episode,
and 7 if the current or most recent episode is Unspecified.
3. The fifth digit (except for Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic,
and Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Unspecified) indicates the follow-
ing: 1 for Mild severity, 2 for Moderate severity, 3 for Severe Without Psychotic
Features, 4 for Severe With Psychotic Features, 5 for In Partial Remission, 6 for
In Full Remission, and 0 if Unspecified. Other specifiers for Bipolar I Disorder
cannot be coded. For Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic, the
fifth digit is always 0. For Bipolar Disorder, Most Recent Episode Unspecified,
there is no fifth digit.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order:
Bipolar I Disorder, specifiers coded in the fourth digit (e.g., Most Recent Episode Manic),
specifiers coded in the fifth digit (e.g., Mild, Severe With Psychotic Features, In Partial
Remission), as many specifiers (without codes) as apply to the most recent episode (e.g.,
With Melancholic Features, With Postpartum Onset), and as many specifiers (without
codes) as apply to the course of episodes (e.g., With Rapid Cycling); for example, 296.54
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, Severe With Psychotic Features,
With Melancholic Features, With Rapid Cycling.
Note that if the single episode of Bipolar I Disorder is a Mixed Episode, the diagnosis
would be indicated as 296.Ox Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, Mixed.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Completed suicide occurs
in 10%-15% of individuals with Bipolar I Disorder. Child abuse, spouse abuse, or other
violent behavior may occur during severe Manic Episodes or during those with psychotic
features. Other associated problems include school truancy, school failure, occupational
failure, divorce, or episodic antisocial behavior. Other associated mental disorders
include Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,
Panic Disorder, Social Phobia, Substance-Related Disorders.
Associated laboratory findings. There appear to be no laboratory features that
distinguish Major Depressive Episodes found in Major Depressive Disorder from those
in Bipolar I Disorder.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
An age at onset for a first Manic Episode after age 40 years should alert the clinician to
the possibility that the symptoms may be due to a general medical condition or substance
use. There is some evidence that untreated thyroid disease worsens the prognosis of
Bipolar I Disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
There are no reports of differential incidence of Bipolar I Disorder based on race or
ethnicity. There is some evidence that clinicians may have a tendency to overdiagnoseBipolar I Disorder
353
Schizophrenia (instead of Bipolar Disorder) in some ethnic groups and in younger
individuals.
Approximately 10%-15% of adolescents with recurrent Major Depressive Episodes
will go on to develop Bipolar I Disorder. Mixed Episodes appear to be more likely in
adolescents and young adults than in older adults.
Recent epidemiological studies in the United States indicate that Bipolar I Disorder
is approximately equally common in men and women (unlike Major Depressive
Disorder, which is more common in women). Gender appears to be related to the order
of appearance of Manic and Major Depressive Episodes. The first episode in males is
more likely to be a Manic Episode. The first episode in females is more likely to be a
Major Depressive Episode. Women with Bipolar I Disorder have an increased risk of
developing subsequent episodes (often psychotic) in the immediate postpartum period.
Some women have their first episode during the postpartum period. The specifier With
Postpartum Onset may be used to indicate that the onset of the episode is within 4 weeks
of delivery (see p. 386). The premenstrual period may be associated with worsening of
an ongoing Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode.
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of Bipolar I Disorder in community samples has varied from
0.4% to 1.6%.
Course
Bipolar I Disorder is a recurrent disorder—more than 90% of individuals who have a
single Manic Episode go on to have future episodes. Roughly 60%-70% of Manic
Episodes occur immediately before or after a Major Depressive Episode. Manic Episodes
often precede or follow the Major Depressive Episodes in a characteristic pattern for a
particular person. The number of lifetime episodes (both Manic and Major Depressive)
tends to be higher for Bipolar I Disorder compared with Major Depressive Disorder,
Recurrent. Studies of the course of Bipolar I Disorder prior to lithium maintenance
treatment suggest that, on average, four episodes occur in 10 years. The interval between
episodes tends to decrease as the individual ages. There is some evidence that changes
in sleep-wake schedule such as occur during time zone changes or sleep deprivation
may precipitate or exacerbate a Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode. Approximately
5%-15% of individuals with Bipolar I Disorder have multiple (four or more) mood
episodes (Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic) that occur within a given
year. If this pattern is present, it is noted by the specifier With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390).
A rapid-cycling pattern is associated with a poorer prognosis.
Although the majority of individuals with Bipolar I Disorder return to a fully
functional level between episodes, some (20%-30%) continue to display mood lability
and interpersonal or occupational difficulties. Psychotic symptoms may develop after
days or weeks in what was previously a nonpsychotic Manic or Mixed Episode. When
an individual has Manic Episodes with psychotic features, subsequent Manic Episodes
are more likely to have psychotic features. Incomplete interepisode recovery is more
common when the current episode is accompanied by mood-incongruent psychotic
features.354
Mood Disorders
Familial Pattern
First-degree biological relatives of individuals with Bipolar I Disorder have elevated rates
of Bipolar I Disorder (4%-24%), Bipolar II Disorder (l%-5%), and Major Depressive
Disorder (4%-24%). Twin and adoption studies provide strong evidence of a genetic
influence for Bipolar I Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, and Hypomanic Episodes in Bipolar I Disorder must
be distinguished from episodes of a Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition. The diagnosis is Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition for
episodes that are judged to be the direct physiological consequence of a specific general
medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism) (see p. 366). This
determination is based on the history, laboratory findings, or physical examination.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from Major Depressive,
Manic, or Mixed Episodes that occur in Bipolar I Disorder by the fact that a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically
related to the mood disturbance (see p. 370). Symptoms like those seen in a Manic,
Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode may be part of an intoxication with or withdrawal from
a drug of abuse and should be diagnosed as a Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (e.g.,
euphoric mood that occurs only in the context of intoxication with cocaine would be
diagnosed as Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features, With Onset During
Intoxication). Symptoms like those seen in a Manic or Mixed Episode may also be
precipitated by antidepressant treatment such as medication, electroconvulsive therapy,
or light therapy. Such episodes may be diagnosed as a Substance-Induced Mood Disorder
(e.g., Amitriptyline-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features; Electroconvulsive
Therapy-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features) and would not count toward a
diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder. However, when the substance use or medication is
judged not to fully account for the episode (e.g., the episode continues for a considerable
period autonomously after the substance is discontinued), the episode would count
toward a diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder.
Bipolar I Disorder is distinguished from Major Depressive Disorder and Dysthy-
mic Disorder by the lifetime history of at least one Manic or Mixed Episode. Bipolar I
Disorder is distinguished from Bipolar II Disorder by the presence of one or more
Manic or Mixed Episodes. When an individual previously diagnosed with Bipolar II
Disorder develops a Manic or Mixed Episode, the diagnosis is changed to Bipolar I
Disorder.
In Cyclothymic Disorder, there are numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms
that do not meet criteria for a Manic Episode and periods of depressive symptoms that
do not meet symptom or duration criteria for a Major Depressive Episode. Bipolar I
Disorder is distinguished from Cyclothymic Disorder by the presence of one or more
Manic or Mixed Episodes. If a Manic or Mixed Episode occurs after the first 2 years of
Cyclothymic Disorder, then Cyclothymic Disorder and Bipolar I Disorder may both be
diagnosed.
The differential diagnosis between Psychotic Disorders (e.g., Schizoaffective
Disorder, Schizophrenia, and Delusional Disorder) and Bipolar I Disorder may be
difficult (especially in adolescents) because these disorders may share a number of
presenting symptoms (e.g., grandiose and persecutory delusions, irritability, agitation,Bipolar I Disorder
355
and catatonic symptoms), particularly cross-sectionally and early in their course. In
contrast to Bipolar I Disorder, Schizophrenia, Schizoaffective Disorder, and Delusional
Disorder are all characterized by periods of psychotic symptoms that occur in the absence
of prominent mood symptoms. Other helpful considerations include the accompanying
symptoms, previous course, and family history. Manic and depressive symptoms may
be present during Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder, and Psychotic Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified, but rarely with sufficient number, duration, and pervasiveness to
meet criteria for a Manic Episode or a Major Depressive Episode. However, when full
criteria are met (or the symptoms are of particular clinical significance), a diagnosis of
Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified may be made in addition to the diagnosis
of Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
If there is a very rapid alternation (over days) between manic symptoms and
depressive symptoms (e.g., several days of purely manic symptoms followed by several
days of purely depressive symptoms) that do not meet minimal duration criteria for a
Manic Episode or Major Depressive Episode, the diagnosis is Bipolar Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified.
I Diagnostic criteria for 296.Ox Bipolar I Disorder,
Single Manic Episode
A. Presence of only one Manic Episode (see p. 332) and no past Major
Depressive Episodes.
Note: Recurrence is defined as either a change in polarity from depression or
an interval of at least 2 months without manic symptoms.
B. The Manic Episode is not better accounted for by Schizoaffective
Disorder and is not superimposed on Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform
Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified.
Specify if:
Mixed: if symptoms meet criteria for a Mixed Episode (see p. 335)
Specify (for current or most recent episode):
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers (see p. 378)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)356
Mood Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for 296.40 Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Hypomanic
A. Currently (or most recently) in a Hypomanic Episode (see p. 338).
B. There has previously been at least one Manic Episode (see p. 332) or
Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
C. The mood symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The mood episodes in Criteria A and B are not better accounted for by
Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified.
Specify:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)
• Diagnostic criteria for 296Ax Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Manic
A. Currently (or most recently) in a Manic Episode (see p. 332).
B. There has previously been at least one Major Depressive Episode (see
p. 327), Manic Episode (see p. 332), or Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
C. The mood episodes in Criteria A and B are not better accounted for by
Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified.
Specify (for current or most recent episode):
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers (see p. 378)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)
Specify:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)Bipolar I Disorder
357
I Diagnostic criteria for 296.6x Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Mixed
A. Currently (or most recently) in a Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
B. There has previously been at least one Major Depressive Episode (see
p. 327), Manic Episode (see p. 332), or Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
C. The mood episodes in Criteria A and B are not better accounted for by
Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified.
Specify (for current or most recent episode):
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers (see p. 380)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)
Specify-.
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)
• Diagnostic criteria for 296.5x Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Depressed
A. Currently (or most recently) in a Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327).
B. There has previously been at least one Manic Episode (see p. 332) or
Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
C. The mood episodes in Criteria A and B are not better accounted for by
Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified.
Specify (for current or most recent episode):
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers (see p. 376)
Chronic (see p. 382)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (see p. 383)
(continued)358
Mood Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 296.5x Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Depressed (continued)
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)
Specify:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)
I Diagnostic criteria for 296.7 Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Unspecified
A. Criteria, except for duration, are currently (or most recently) met for a
Manic (see p. 332), a Hypomanic (see p. 338), a Mixed (see p. 335), or
a Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327).
B. There has previously been at least one Manic Episode (see p. 332) or
Mixed Episode (see p. 335).
C. The mood symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The mood symptoms in Criteria A and B are not better accounted for
by Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophre-
nia, Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Dis-
order Not Otherwise Specified.
E. The mood symptoms in Criteria A and B are not due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication,
or other treatment) or a general medical condition (e.g., hyperthy-
roidism).
Specify:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)296.89 Bipolar II Disorder
359
296.89 Bipolar II Disorder
(Recurrent Major Depressive Episodes
With Hypomanic Episodes)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Bipolar II Disorder is a clinical course that is characterized by
the occurrence of one or more Major Depressive Episodes (Criterion A) accompanied
by at least one Hypomanic Episode (Criterion B). Hypomanic Episodes should not be
confused with the several days of euthymia that may follow remission of a Major
Depressive Episode. The presence of a Manic or Mixed Episode precludes the diagnosis
of Bipolar II Disorder (Criterion C). Episodes of Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (due
to the direct physiological effects of a medication, other somatic treatments for
depression, drugs of abuse, or toxin exposure) or of Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition do not count toward a diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder. In addition,
the episodes must not be better accounted for by Schizoaffective Disorder and are not
superimposed on Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or
Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning (Criterion E). In some cases, the Hypomanic Episodes themselves
do not cause impairment. Instead, the impairment may result from the Major Depressive
Episodes or from a chronic pattern of unpredictable mood episodes and fluctuating
unreliable interpersonal or occupational functioning.
Individuals with Bipolar II Disorder may not view the Hypomanic Episodes as
pathological, although others may be troubled by the individuals' erratic behavior. Often
individuals, particularly when in the midst of a Major Depressive Episode, do not recall
periods of hypomania without reminders from close friends or relatives. Information
from other informants is often critical in establishing the diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder.
Specifiers
The following specifiers for Bipolar II Disorder should be used to indicate the current
or most recent episode:
Hypomanic. This specifier is used if the current (or most recent) episode is a
Hypomanic Episode.
Depressed. This specifier is used if the current (or most recent) episode is a
Major Depressive Episode.
The following specifiers may be used to describe the current Major Depressive
Episode in Bipolar II Disorder (or the most recent Major Depressive Episode if currently
in remission only if it is the most recent type of mood episode):
Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features, Severe With Psychotic
Features, In Partial Remission, In Full Remission (see p. 376)
Chronic (see p. 382)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (see p. 383)
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)360
Mood Disorders
The following specifiers may be used to indicate the pattern or frequency of
episodes:
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode Recovery)
(see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)
Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for Bipolar II Disorder is 296.89; none of the specifiers are codable.
In recording the name of the diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order:
Bipolar II Disorder, specifiers indicating current or most recent episode (e.g., Hypomanic,
Depressed), as many specifiers as apply to the current or most recent Major Depressive
Episode (e.g., Moderate, With Melancholic Features, With Postpartum Onset), and as
many specifiers as apply to the course of episodes (e.g., With Seasonal Pattern); for
example, 296.89 Bipolar II Disorder, Depressed, Severe With Psychotic Features, With
Melancholic Features, With Seasonal Pattern.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Completed suicide (usu-
ally during Major Depressive Episodes) is a significant risk, occurring in 10%-15% of
persons with Bipolar II Disorder. School truancy, school failure, occupational failure, or
divorce may be associated with Bipolar II Disorder. Associated mental disorders include
Substance Abuse or Dependence, Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder, Panic Disorder, Social Phobia, and Borderline Personality
Disorder.
Associated laboratory findings. There appear to be no laboratory features that
distinguish Major Depressive Episodes found in Major Depressive Disorder from those
in Bipolar II Disorder.
Specific Gender Features
Bipolar II Disorder may be more common in women than in men. Women with Bipolar
II Disorder may be at increased risk of developing subsequent episodes in the immediate
postpartum period.
Prevalence
Community studies suggest a lifetime prevalence of Bipolar II Disorder of approximately
0.5%.
Course
Roughly 60%-70% of the Hypomanic Episodes in Bipolar II Disorder occur immediately
before or after a Major Depressive Episode. Hypomanic Episodes often precede or follow296.89 Bipolar II Disorder
361
the Major Depressive Episodes in a characteristic pattern for a particular person. The
number of lifetime episodes (both Hypomanic Episodes and Major Depressive Episodes)
tends to be higher for Bipolar II Disorder compared with Major Depressive Disorder,
Recurrent. The interval between episodes tends to decrease as the individual ages.
Approximately 5%-15% of individuals with Bipolar II Disorder have multiple (four or
more) mood episodes (Hypomanic or Major Depressive) that occur within a given year.
If this pattern is present, it is noted by the specifier With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390).
A rapid-cycling pattern is associated with a poorer prognosis.
Although the majority of individuals with Bipolar II Disorder return to a fully
functional level between episodes, approximately 15% continue to display mood lability
and interpersonal or occupational difficulties. Psychotic symptoms do not occur in
Hypomanic Episodes, and they appear to be less frequent in the Major Depressive
Episodes in Bipolar II Disorder than is the case for Bipolar I Disorder. Some evidence
is consistent with the notion that marked changes in sleep-wake schedule such as occur
during time zone changes or sleep deprivation may precipitate or exacerbate Hypomanic
or Major Depressive Episodes. If a Manic or Mixed Episode develops in the course of
Bipolar II Disorder, the diagnosis is changed to Bipolar I Disorder. Over 5 years, about
5%-15% of individuals with Bipolar II Disorder will develop a Manic Episode.
Familial Pattern
Some studies have indicated that first-degree biological relatives of individuals with
Bipolar II Disorder have elevated rates of Bipolar II Disorder, Bipolar I Disorder, and
Major Depressive Disorder compared with the general population.
Differential
Diagnosis
Hypomanic and Major Depressive Episodes in Bipolar II Disorder must be distinguished
from episodes of a Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. The
diagnosis is Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition for episodes that are
judged to be the direct physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition
(e.g., multiple sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism) (see p. 366). This determination is based
on the history, laboratory findings, or physical examination.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from Hypomanic or Major
Depressive Episodes that occur in Bipolar II Disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g.,
a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related
to the mood disturbance (see p. 370). Symptoms like those seen in a Hypomanic Episode
may be part of an intoxication with or withdrawal from a drug of abuse and should be
diagnosed as a Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (e.g., a major depressive-like episode
occurring only in the context of withdrawal from cocaine would be diagnosed as
Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features, With Onset During With-
drawal). Symptoms like those seen in a Hypomanic Episode may also be precipitated
by antidepressant treatment such as medication, electroconvulsive therapy, or light
therapy. Such episodes may be diagnosed as a Substance-Induced Mood Disorder (e.g.,
Amitriptyline-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features; Electroconvulsive Therapy-
Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features) and would not count toward a diagnosis
of Bipolar II Disorder. However, when the substance use or medication is judged not
to fully account for the episode (e.g., the episode continues for a considerable period362
Mood Disorders
autonomously after the substance is discontinued), the episode would count toward a
diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder.
Bipolar II Disorder is distinguished from Major Depressive Disorder and Dysthy-
mic Disorder by the lifetime history of at least one Hypomanic Episode. Bipolar II
Disorder is distinguished from Bipolar I Disorder by the presence of one or more
Manic or Mixed Episodes in the latter. When an individual previously diagnosed with
Bipolar II Disorder develops a Manic or Mixed Episode, the diagnosis is changed to
Bipolar I disorder.
In Cyclothymic Disorder, there are numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms
and numerous periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet symptom or duration
criteria for a Major Depressive Episode. Bipolar II Disorder is distinguished from
Cyclothymic Disorder by the presence of one or more Major Depressive Episodes. If a
Major Depressive Episode occurs after the first 2 years of Cyclothymic Disorder, the
additional diagnosis of Bipolar II Disorder is given.
Bipolar II Disorder must be distinguished from Psychotic Disorders (e.g.,
Schizoaffective Disorder, Schizophrenia, and Delusional Disorder). Schizophrenia,
Schizoaffective Disorder, and Delusional Disorder are all characterized by periods of
psychotic symptoms that occur in the absence of prominent mood symptoms. Other
helpful considerations include the accompanying symptoms, previous course, and family
history.
I Diagnostic criteria for 296.89 Bipolar II Disorder
A. Presence (or history) of one or more Major Depressive Episodes (see
p. 327).
B. Presence (or history) of at least one Hypomanic Episode (see p. 338).
C. There has never been a Manic Episode (see p. 332) or a Mixed Episode
(see p. 335).
D. The mood symptoms in Criteria A and B are not better accounted for
by Schizoaffective Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophre-
nia, Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Dis-
order Not Otherwise Specified.
E. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify current or most recent episode:
Hypomanic: if currently (or most recently) in a Hypomanic Episode (see
p. 338)
Depressed: if currently (or most recently) in a Major Depressive Episode
(see p. 327)
(continued)301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder
363
D Diagnostic criteria for 296.89 Bipolar II Disorder (continued)
Specify (for current or most recent Major Depressive Episode only if it is the
most recent type of mood episode):
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers (see p. 376) Note: Fifth-
digit codes specified on p. 377 cannot be used here because the code
for Bipolar II Disorder already uses the fifth digit.
Chronic (see p. 382)
With Catatonic Features (see p. 382)
With Melancholic Features (see p. 383)
With Atypical Features (see p. 384)
With Postpartum Onset (see p. 386)
Specify-.
Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With and Without Interepisode
Recovery) (see p. 387)
With Seasonal Pattern (applies only to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes) (see p. 389)
With Rapid Cycling (see p. 390)
301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Cyclothymic Disorder is a chronic, fluctuating mood disturbance
involving numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms (see p. 335) and numerous periods
of depressive symptoms (see p. 320) (Criterion A). The hypomanic symptoms are of
insufficient number, severity, pervasiveness, or duration to meet full criteria for a Manic
Episode, and the depressive symptoms are of insufficient number, severity, pervasive-
ness, or duration to meet full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode. During the 2-year
period (1 year for children or adolescents), any symptom-free intervals last no longer
than 2 months (Criterion B). The diagnosis of Cyclothymic Disorder is made only if the
initial 2-year period of Cyclothymic symptoms is free of Major Depressive, Manic, and
Mixed Episodes (Criterion C). After the initial 2 years of the Cyclothymic Disorder, Manic
or Mixed Episodes may be superimposed on the Cyclothymic Disorder, in which case
both Cyclothymic Disorder and Bipolar I Disorder are diagnosed. Similarly, after the
initial 2 years of Cyclothymic Disorder, Major Depressive Episodes may be superimposed
on the Cyclothymic Disorder, in which case both Cyclothymic Disorder and Bipolar II
Disorder are diagnosed. The diagnosis is not made if the pattern of mood swings is
better accounted for by Schizoaffective Disorder or is superimposed on a Psychotic
Disorder, such as Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or
Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (Criterion D), in which case the mood
symptoms are considered to be associated features of the Psychotic Disorder. The mood
disturbance must also not be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism)
(Criterion E). Although some people may function particularly well during some of the364
Mood Disorders
periods of hypomania, overall there must be clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning as a result of the mood
disturbance (Criterion F). The impairment may develop as a result of prolonged periods
of cyclical, often unpredictable mood changes (e.g., the person may be regarded as
temperamental, moody, unpredictable, inconsistent, or unreliable).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Substance-Related Disor-
ders and Sleep Disorders (i.e., difficulties in initiating and maintaining sleep) may be
present.
Specific Age and Gender Features
Cyclothymic Disorder often begins early in life and is sometimes considered to reflect a
temperamental predisposition to other Mood Disorders (especially Bipolar Disorders).
In community samples, Cyclothymic Disorder is apparently equally common in men and
in women. In clinical settings, women with Cyclothymic Disorder may be more likely
to present for treatment than men.
Prevalence
Studies have reported a lifetime prevalence of Cyclothymic Disorder of from 0.4% to 1%.
Prevalence in mood disorders clinics may range from 3% to 5%.
Course
Cyclothymic Disorder usually begins in adolescence or early adult life. Onset of
Cyclothymic Disorder late in adult life may suggest a Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition such as multiple sclerosis. Cyclothymic Disorder usually has an
insidious onset and a chronic course. There is a 15%-50% risk that the person will
subsequently develop Bipolar I or II Disorder.
Familial Pattern
Major Depressive Disorder and Bipolar I or II Disorder appear to be more common
among first-degree biological relatives of persons with Cyclothymic Disorder than among
the general population. There may also be an increased familial risk of Substance-Related
Disorders.
Differential Diagnosis
Cyclothymic Disorder must be distinguished from a Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition, With Mixed Features, when the mood disturbance is judged to be the direct
physiological consequence of a specific, usually chronic general medical condition (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism) (see p. 366). This determination is based on the history, laboratory
findings, or physical examination. If it is judged that the depressive symptoms are not301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder
365
the direct physiological consequence of the general medical condition, then the primary
Mood Disorder is recorded on Axis I (e.g., Cyclothymic Disorder) and the general medical
condition is recorded on Axis III. This would be the case, for example, if the mood
symptoms are considered to be the psychological consequence of having a chronic
general medical condition or if there is no etiological relationship between the mood
symptoms and the general medical condition.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from Cyclothymic Disorder
by the fact that a substance (especially stimulants) is judged to be etiologically related
to the mood disturbance (see p. 370). The frequent mood swings that are suggestive of
Cyclothymic Disorder usually dissipate following cessation of drug use.
Bipolar I Disorder, With Rapid Cycling, and Bipolar n Disorder, With Rapid
Cycling, both may resemble Cyclothymic Disorder by virtue of the frequent marked
shifts in mood. By definition, the mood states in Cyclothymic Disorder do not meet the
full criteria for a Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episode, whereas the specifier With
Rapid Cycling requires that full mood episodes be present. If a Major Depressive, Manic,
or Mixed Episode occurs during the course of an established Cyclothymic Disorder, the
diagnosis of either Bipolar I Disorder (for a Manic or Mixed Episode) or Bipolar II
Disorder (for a Major Depressive Episode) is given along with the diagnosis of
Cyclothymic Disorder.
Borderline Personality Disorder is associated with marked shifts in mood that
may suggest Cyclothymic Disorder. If the criteria are met for each disorder, both
Borderline Personality Disorder and Cyclothymic Disorder may be diagnosed.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder
A. For at least 2 years, the presence of numerous periods with hypomanic
symptoms (see p. 338) and numerous periods with depressive symptoms
that do not meet criteria for a Major Depressive Episode. Note: In
children and adolescents, the duration must be at least 1 year.
B. During the above 2-year period (1 year in children and adolescents),
the person has not been without the symptoms in Criterion A for more
than 2 months at a time.
C. No Major Depressive Episode (p. 327), Manic Episode (p. 332), or Mixed
Episode (see p. 335) has been present during the first 2 years of the
disturbance.
Note: After the initial 2 years (1 year in children and adolescents) of
Cyclothymic Disorder, there may be superimposed Manic or Mixed Episodes
(in which case both Bipolar I Disorder and Cyclothymic Disorder may be
diagnosed) or Major Depressive Episodes (in which case both Bipolar II
Disorder and Cyclothymic Disorder may be diagnosed).
(continued)366
Mood Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 301.13 Cyclothymic Disorder
(continued)
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better accounted for by Schizoaffec-
tive Disorder and are not superimposed on Schizophrenia, Schizophren-
iform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified.
E. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
F. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
296.80 Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category includes disorders with bipolar
features that do not meet criteria for any specific Bipolar Disorder. Examples include
1. Very rapid alternation (over days) between manic symptoms and depressive
symptoms that do not meet minimal duration criteria for a Manic Episode or a
Major Depressive Episode
2. Recurrent Hypomanic Episodes without intercurrent depressive symptoms
3. A Manic or Mixed Episode superimposed on Delusional Disorder, residual
Schizophrenia, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
4. Situations in which the clinician has concluded that a Bipolar Disorder is present
but is unable to determine whether it is primary, due to a general medical
condition, or substance induced
Mood Disorder
293.83 Mood Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is a
prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that is judged to be due to the direct
physiological effects of a general medical condition. The mood disturbance may involve
depressed mood; markedly diminished interest or pleasure; or elevated, expansive, or
irritable mood (Criterion A). Although the clinical presentation of the mood disturbance
may resemble that of a Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode, the full
criteria for one of these episodes need not be met; the predominant symptom type may293.83 Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
367
be indicated by using one of the following subtypes: With Depressive Features, With
Major Depressive-Like Episode, With Manic Features, or With Mixed Features. There
must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of a general medical condition
(Criterion B). The mood disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (e.g., Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood that occurs in response to
the psychosocial stress of having the general medical condition) (Criterion C). The
diagnosis is also not made if the mood disturbance occurs only during the course of a
delirium (Criterion D). The mood disturbance must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
E). In some cases, the individual may still be able to function, but only with markedly
increased effort.
In determining whether the mood disturbance is due to a general medical condition,
the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition. Further,
the clinician must establish that the mood disturbance is etiologically related to the
general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and com-
prehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment. Although
there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the
mood disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological, several considerations
provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a temporal
association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general medical
condition and that of the mood disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of
features that are atypical of primary Mood Disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course
or absence of family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can
be a direct association between the general medical condition in question and the
development of mood symptoms can provide a useful context in the assessment of a
particular situation. In addition, the clinician must also judge that the disturbance is not
better accounted for by a primary Mood Disorder, a Substance-Induced Mood Disorder,
or other primary mental disorders (e.g., Adjustment Disorder). This determination is
explained in greater detail in the "Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition"
section (p. 165).
In contrast to Major Depressive Disorder, Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition, With Depressive Features, appears to be nearly equally distributed by gender.
Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition increases the risk of attempted and
completed suicide. Rates of suicide are variable depending on the particular general
medical condition, with chronic, incurable, and painful conditions (e.g., malignancy,
spinal cord injury, peptic ulcer disease, Huntington's disease, acquired immunodefici-
ency syndrome [AIDS], end-stage renal disease, head injury) carrying the greatest risk
for suicide.
Subtypes
One of the following subtypes may be used to indicate which of the following symptom
presentations predominates:
With Depressive Features. This subtype is used if the predominant mood is
depressed, but the full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode are not met.
With Major Depressive—Like Episode. This subtype is used if the full criteria
(except Criterion D) for a Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327) are met.368
Mood Disorders
With Manic Features. This subtype is used if the predominant mood is
elevated, euphoric, or irritable.
With Mixed Features. This subtype is used if the symptoms of both mania and
depression are present but neither predominates.
Recording Procedures
In recording the diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, the
clinician should note both the specific phenomenology of the disturbance, including the
appropriate subtype, and the identified general medical condition judged to be causing
the disturbance on Axis I (e.g., 293.83 Mood Disorder Due to Thyrotoxicosis, With Manic
Features). The ICD-9-CM code for the general medical condition should also be noted
on Axis III (e.g., 242.9 thyrotoxicosis). (See Appendix G for a list of selected ICD-9-CM
diagnostic codes for general medical conditions.)
A separate diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not
given if the depressive symptoms develop exclusively during the course of Dementia of
the Alzheimer's Type or Vascular Dementia. In this case, the depressive symptoms are
indicated by specifying the subtype With Depressed Mood (e.g., 290.21 Dementia of the
Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, With Depressed Mood).
Associated General Medical Conditions
A variety of general medical conditions may cause mood symptoms. These conditions
include degenerative neurological conditions (e.g., Parkinson's disease, Huntington's
disease), cerebrovascular disease (e.g., stroke), metabolic conditions (e.g., vitamin B 12
deficiency), endocrine conditions (e.g., hyper- and hypothyroidism, hyper- and
hypoparathyroidism, hyper- and hypoadrenocorticism), autoimmune conditions (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus), viral or other infections (e.g., hepatitis, mononucleosis,
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]), and certain cancers (e.g., carcinoma of the
pancreas). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and
patterns of prevalence or onset reflect the etiological general medical condition.
Prevalence
Prevalence estimates for Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition are confined
to those presentations with depressive features. It has been observed that 25%-40% of
individuals with certain neurological conditions (including Parkinson's disease,
Huntington's disease, multiple sclerosis, stroke, and Alzheimer's disease) will develop a
marked depressive disturbance at some point during the course of the illness. For general
medical conditions without direct central nervous system involvement, rates are far more
variable, ranging from more than 60% in Cushing's syndrome to less than 8% in end-stage
renal disease.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not given
if the mood disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. When the
clinician wishes to indicate the presence of clinically significant mood symptoms that293.83 Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
369
occur in the context of a Dementia Due to a General Medical Condition, a separate
diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition can be indicated. An
exception to this is when depressive symptoms occur exclusively during the course of
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type or Vascular Dementia. In these cases, only a
diagnosis of Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type or of Vascular Dementia with the subtype
With Depressed Mood is given; a separate diagnosis of Mood Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition is not made. If the presentation includes a mix of different types of
symptoms (e.g., mood and anxiety), the specific mental disorder due to a general medical
condition depends on which symptoms predominate in the clinical picture.
If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance use (including medications
with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure to a toxin, a
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder should be considered. It may be useful to obtain
a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that
occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of) Substance Intoxication or
Withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a Substance-Induced
Disorder, depending on the character, duration, or amount of the substance used. If the
clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a general medical condition
and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition and Substance-Induced Mood Disorder) are given.
Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition must be distinguished from
Major Depressive Disorder, Bipolar I Disorder, Bipolar n Disorder, and Adjust-
ment Disorder With Depressed Mood (e.g., a maladaptive response to the stress of
having a general medical condition). In Major Depressive, Bipolar, and Adjustment
Disorders, no specific and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a
general medical condition can be demonstrated. It is often difficult to determine whether
certain symptoms (e.g., weight loss, insomnia, fatigue) represent a mood disturbance or
are a direct manifestation of a general medical condition (e.g., cancer, stroke, myocardial
infarction, diabetes). Such symptoms count toward a diagnosis of a Major Depressive
Episode except in cases where they are clearly and fully accounted for by a general
medical condition. If the clinician cannot determine whether the mood disturbance is
primary, substance induced, or due to a general medical condition, Mood Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified may be diagnosed.
Diagnostic criteria for 293.83 Mood Disorder
Due to ... [indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood predominates in the
clinical picture and is characterized by either (or both) of the following:
(1) depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all,
or almost all, activities
(2) elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
a general medical condition.
(continued)370
Mood Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 293.83 Mood Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical Condition] (continued)
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood in response to the
stress of having a general medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify type:
With Depressive Features: if the predominant mood is depressed but
the full criteria are not met for a Major Depressive Episode
With Major Depressive-Like Episode: if the full criteria are met (except
Criterion D) for a Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327)
With Manic Features: if the predominant mood is elevated, euphoric, or
irritable
With Mixed Features: if the symptoms of both mania and depression are
present but neither predominates
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
293.83 Mood Disorder Due to Hypothyroidism, With Depressive Features; also code
the general medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).
Coding note: If depressive symptoms occur as part of a preexisting dementia,
indicate the depressive symptoms by coding the appropriate subtype of the
dementia if one is available, e.g., 290.21 Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With
Late Onset, With Depressed Mood.
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is a prominent and persistent
disturbance in mood (Criterion A) that is judged to be due to the direct physiological
effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, other somatic treatment for
depression, or toxin exposure) (Criterion B). Depending on the nature of the substance
and the context in which the symptoms occur (i.e., during intoxication or withdrawal),
the disturbance may involve depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or
pleasure or elevated, expansive, or irritable mood. Although the clinical presentation of
the mood disturbance may resemble that of a Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or
Hypomanic Episode, the full criteria for one of these episodes need not be met. The
predominant symptom type may be indicated by using one of the following subtypes:
With Depressive Features, With Manic Features, With Mixed Features. The disturbance
must not be better accounted for by a Mood Disorder that is not substance inducedSubstance-Induced Mood Disorder
371
(Criterion C). The diagnosis is not made if the mood disturbance occurs only during the
course of a delirium (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Crite-
rion E). In some cases, the individual may still be able to function, but only with markedly
increased effort. This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance
Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal only when the mood symptoms are in excess of
those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when the
mood symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from a primary Mood Disorder
by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse, there must be
evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of intoxication
or withdrawal. Substance-Induced Mood Disorders arise only in association with
intoxication or withdrawal states, whereas primary Mood Disorders may precede the
onset of substance use or may occur during times of sustained abstinence. Because the
withdrawal state for some substances can be relatively protracted, the onset of the mood
symptoms can occur up to 4 weeks after the cessation of substance use. Another
consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of primary Mood Disorders
(e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the onset of a Manic Episode after
age 45 years may suggest a substance-induced etiology. In contrast, factors that suggest
that the mood symptoms are better accounted for by a primary Mood Disorder include
persistence of mood symptoms for a substantial period of time (i.e., about a month)
after the end of Substance Intoxication or acute Substance Withdrawal; the development
of mood symptoms that are substantially in excess of what would be expected given
the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use; or a history of prior
recurrent primary episodes of Mood Disorder.
Some medications (e.g., stimulants, steroids, L-dopa, antidepressants) or other
somatic treatments for depression (e.g., electroconvulsive therapy or light therapy) can
induce manic-like mood disturbances. Clinical judgment is essential to determine
whether the treatment is truly causal or whether a primary Mood Disorder happened to
have its onset while the person was receiving the treatment. For example, manic
symptoms that develop in a person while he or she is taking lithium would not be
diagnosed as Substance-Induced Mood Disorder because lithium is not likely to induce
manic-like episodes. On the other hand, a depressive episode that developed within the
first several weeks of beginning alpha-methyldopa (an antihypertensive agent) in a
person with no history of Mood Disorder would qualify for the diagnosis of alpha-
Methyldopa-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features. In some cases, a
previously established condition (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent) can recur
while the person is coincidentally taking a medication that has the capacity to cause
depressive symptoms (e.g., L-dopa, birth-control pills). In such cases, the clinician must
make a judgment as to whether the medication is causative in this particular situation.
For a more detailed discussion of Substance-Related Disorders, see p. 175.
Subtypes and Specifiers
One of the following subtypes may be used to indicate which of the following symptom
presentations predominates:
With Depressive Features. This subtype is used if the predominant mood is
depressed.372
Mood Disorders
With Manic Features. This subtype is used if the predominant mood is
elevated, euphoric, or irritable.
With Mixed Features. This subtype is used if the symptoms of both mania and
depression are present but neither predominates.
The context of the development of the mood symptoms may be indicated by using
one of the following specifiers:
With Onset During Intoxication. This specifier should be used if criteria for
intoxication with the substance are met and the symptoms develop during the
intoxication syndrome.
With Onset During Withdrawal. This specifier should be used if criteria for
withdrawal from the substance are met and the symptoms develop during, or
shortly after, a withdrawal syndrome.
Recording Procedures
The name of the Substance-Induced Mood Disorder begins with the specific substance
or somatic treatment (e.g., cocaine, amitriptyline, electroconvulsive therapy) that is
presumed to be causing the mood symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the
listing of classes of substances provided in the criteria set. For substances that do not fit
into any of the classes (e.g., amitriptyline) and for other somatic treatments (e.g.,
electroconvulsive therapy), the code for "Other Substance" should be used. In addition,
for medications prescribed at therapeutic doses, the specific medication can be indicated
by listing the appropriate E-code (see Appendix G). The name of the disorder (e.g.,
Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder) is followed by the subtype indicating the predominant
symptom presentation and the specifier indicating the context in which the symptoms
developed (e.g., 292.84 Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features,
With Onset During Withdrawal). When more than one substance is judged to play a
significant role in the development of mood symptoms, each should be listed separately
(e.g., 292.84 Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features, With Onset During
Withdrawal; 292.84 Light Therapy-Induced Mood Disorder, With Manic Features). If a
substance is judged to be the etiological factor but the specific substance or class of
substances is unknown, the category 292.84 Unknown Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder may be used.
Specific Substances
Mood Disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes
of substances: alcohol; amphetamine and related substances; cocaine; hallucinogens;
inhalants; opioids; phencyclidine and related substances; sedatives, hypnotics, and
anxiolytics; and other or unknown substances. Mood Disorders can occur in association
with withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; amphetamine and
related substances; cocaine; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other or unknown
substances.
Some of the medications reported to evoke mood symptoms include anesthetics,
analgesics, anticholinergics, anticonvulsants, antihypertensives, antiparkinsonian medi-
cations, antiulcer medications, cardiac medications, oral contraceptives, psychotropic
medications (e.g., antidepressants, benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, disulfiram), muscleSubstance-Induced Mood Disorder
373
relaxants, steroids, and sulfonamides. Some medications have an especially high
likelihood of producing depressive features (e.g., high doses of reserpine, cortico-
steroids, anabolic steroids). Note that this is not an exhaustive list of possible medications
and that many medications may occasionally produce an idiosyncratic depressive
reaction. Heavy metals and toxins (e.g., volatile substances such as gasoline and paint,
organophosphate insecticides, nerve gases, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide) may also
cause mood symptoms.
Differential
Diagnosis
Mood symptoms occur commonly in Substance Intoxication and Substance With-
drawal, and the diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or substance-specific
withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance
Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal only when the mood symptoms are judged to be
in excess of those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and
when the mood symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention. For example, dysphoric mood is a characteristic feature of Cocaine Withdrawal.
Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder should be diagnosed instead of Cocaine Withdrawal
only if the mood disturbance is substantially more intense than what is usually
encountered with Cocaine Withdrawal and is sufficiently severe to be a separate focus
of attention and treatment.
If substance-induced mood symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium, the mood symptoms are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium
and are not diagnosed separately. In substance-induced presentations that contain
a mix of different types of symptoms (e.g., mood, psychotic, and anxiety symptoms),
the specific type of Substance-Induced Disorder to be diagnosed depends on which
type of symptoms predominates in the clinical presentation.
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from a primary Mood
Disorder by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms
(p. 371).
A Substance-Induced Mood Disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental
disorder or general medical condition must have its onset while the person is receiving
the medication (e.g., antihypertensive medication) (or during withdrawal, if there is a
withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Once the treatment is discon-
tinued, the mood symptoms will usually remit within days to several weeks (depending
on the half-life of the substance and the presence of a withdrawal syndrome). If
symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes for the mood symptoms should be
considered.
Because individuals with general medical conditions often take medications for
those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the mood symptoms are
caused by the physiological consequences of the general medical condition rather than
the medication, in which case Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a judgment. At times,
a change in the treatment for the general medical condition (e.g., medication substitution
or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically for that person whether the
medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is
due to both a general medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., Mood374
Mood Disorders
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Mood Disorder)
may be given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine whether the mood
symptoms are due to a substance (including a medication) or to a general medical
condition or are primary (i.e., not due to either a substance or a general medical
condition), Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified or Bipolar Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified would be indicated.
Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced
Mood Disorder
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood predominates in the
clinical picture and is characterized by either (or both) of the following:
(1) depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all,
or almost all, activities
(2) elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of either (1) or (2):
(1) the symptoms in Criterion A developed during, or within a month
of, Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal
(2) medication use is etiologically related to the disturbance
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by a Mood Disorder that is
not substance induced. Evidence that the symptoms are better accounted
for by a Mood Disorder that is not substance induced might include the
following: the symptoms precede the onset of the substance use (or
medication use); the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time
(e.g., about a month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe
intoxication or are substantially in excess of what would be expected
given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use;
or there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent
non-substance-induced Mood Disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent Major
Depressive Episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxi-
cation or Substance Withdrawal only when the mood symptoms are in excess of
those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when
the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
(continued)296.90 Mood Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
375
D Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Mood Disorder
(continued)
Code (Specific Substancej-Induced Mood Disorder:
(291.8 Alcohol; 292.84 Amphetamine [or Amphetamine-Like Substance];
292.84 Cocaine; 292.84 Hallucinogen; 292.84 Inhalant; 292.84 Opioid;
292.84 Phencyclidine [or Phencyclidine-Like Substance]; 292.84 Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic; 292.84 Other [or Unknown] Substance)
Specify type:
With Depressive Features: if the predominant mood is depressed
With Manic Features: if the predominant mood is elevated, euphoric, or
irritable
With Mixed Features: if symptoms of both mania and depression are
present and neither predominates
Specify if (see table on p. 177 for applicability by substance):
With Onset During Intoxication: if the criteria are met for Intoxication
with the substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication
syndrome
With Onset During Withdrawal: if criteria are met for Withdrawal from
the substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, a
withdrawal syndrome
296.90 Mood Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category includes disorders with mood symptoms that do not meet the criteria for
any specific Mood Disorder and in which it is difficult to choose between Depressive
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified and Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (e.g.,
acute agitation).
Specifiers Describing Most Recent Episode
A number of specifiers for Mood Disorders are provided to increase diagnostic specificity
and create more homogeneous subgroups, assist in treatment selection, and improve
the prediction of prognosis. The following specifiers pertain to the current (or most
recent) mood episode: Severity/Psychotic/Remission, Chronic, With Catatonic Features,
With Melancholic Features, With Atypical Features, and With Postpartum Onset. The
specifiers that indicate severity, remission, and psychotic features can be coded in the
fifth digit of the diagnostic code for most of the Mood Disorders. The other specifiers
cannot be coded. Table 1 indicates which episode specifiers apply to each Mood
Disorder (see p. 376).376
Mood Disorders
Table 1. Episode specifiers that apply to Mood Disorders
Major Depressive Disorder,
Single Episode
Major Depressive Disorder,
Recurrent
Dysthymic Disorder
Bipolar I Disorder,
Single Manic Episode
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode
Hypomanic
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Manic
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Mixed
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode
Depressed
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode
Unspecified
Bipolar II Disorder,
Hypomanic
Bipolar II Disorder,
Depressed
Cyclothymic Disorder
Severity/
Psychotic/
Remission
With
With
With
With
Catatonic Melancholic Atypical Postpartum
Features
Features
Features
Onset
Chronic X X X X X X
X X X X X
X X
X X X
X X X
X X X
X X X X X X
X X X X X X
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
for Major Depressive Episode
These specifiers apply to the most recent Major Depressive Episode in Major Depressive
Disorder and to a Major Depressive Episode in Bipolar I or II Disorder only if it is the
most recent type of mood episode. If criteria are currently met for the Major Depressive
Episode, it can be classified as Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features, or
Severe With Psychotic Features. If the criteria are no longer met, the specifier indicates
whether the episode is in partial or full remission. For Major Depressive Disorder and
most of the Bipolar I Disorders, the specifier is reflected in the fifth-digit coding for the
disorder.
1—Mild, 2—Moderate, 3—Severe Without Psychotic Features. Severity is judged
to be mild, moderate, or severe based on the number of criteria symptoms, the severity
of the symptoms, and the degree of functional disability and distress. Mild episodes are
characterized by the presence of only five or six depressive symptoms and either mild
disability or the capacity to function normally but with substantial and unusual effort.
Episodes that are Severe Without Psychotic Features are characterized by the presence
of most of the criteria symptoms and clear-cut, observable disability (e.g., inability to
work or care for children). Moderate episodes have a severity that is intermediate
between mild and severe.Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
377
4—Severe With Psychotic Features. This specifier indicates the presence of either
delusions or hallucinations (typically auditory). Most commonly, the content of the
delusions or hallucinations is consistent with the depressive themes. Such mood-
congruent psychotic features include delusions of guilt (e.g., of being responsible for
illness in a loved one), delusions of deserved punishment (e.g., of being punished
because of a moral transgression or some personal inadequacy), nihilistic delusions (e.g.,
of world or personal destruction), somatic delusions (e.g., of cancer or one's body
"rotting away"), or delusions of poverty (e.g., of being bankrupt). Hallucinations, when
present, are usually transient and not elaborate and may involve voices that berate the
person for shortcomings or sins.
Less commonly, the content of the hallucinations or delusions has no apparent
relationship to depressive themes. Such mood-incongruent psychotic features include
persecutor^ delusions (without depressive themes that the individual deserves to be
persecuted), delusions of thought insertion (i.e., one's thoughts are not one's own),
delusions of thought broadcasting (i.e., others can hear one's thoughts) and delusions
of control (i.e., one's actions are under outside control). These features are associated
with a poorer prognosis. The clinician can indicate the nature of the psychotic features
by specifying With Mood-Congruent Features or With Mood-Incongruent Features.
5—In Partial Remission, 6—In Full Remission. Full Remission requires a period
of at least 2 months in which there are no significant symptoms of depression. There
are two ways for the episode to be In Partial Remission: 1) some symptoms of a Major
Depressive Episode are still present, but full criteria are no longer met; or 2) there are
no longer any significant symptoms of a Major Depressive Episode, but the period of
remission has been less than 2 months. If the Major Depressive Episode has been
superimposed on Dysthymic Disorder, the diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder, In
Partial Remission, is not given once the full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode are
no longer met; instead, the diagnosis is Dysthymic Disorder and Major Depressive
Disorder, Prior History.
Criteria for Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
for current (or most recent) Major Depressive
Episode
Note: Code in fifth digit. Can be applied to the most recent Major Depressive
Episode in Major Depressive Disorder and to a Major Depressive Episode in Bipolar
I or II Disorder only if it is the most recent type of mood episode.
.xl—Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis and symptoms result in only minor impairment in occupational
functioning or in usual social activities or relationships with others.
.x2—Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between "mild" and
"severe."
(continued)378
Mood Disorders
D Criteria for Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers for
current (or most recent) Major Depressive Episode
(continued)
.x3—Severe Without Psychotic Features: Several symptoms in excess
of those required to make the diagnosis, and symptoms markedly interfere
with occupational functioning or with usual social activities or relationships
with others.
.x4—Severe With Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucinations. If
possible, specify whether the psychotic features are mood-congruent or
mood-incongru ent:
Mood-Congruent Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucinations
whose content is entirely consistent with the typical depressive themes
of personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved
punishment.
Mood-Incongruent Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucina-
tions whose content does not involve typical depressive themes of
personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved
punishment. Included are such symptoms as persecutory delusions
(not directly related to depressive themes), thought insertion, thought
broadcasting, and delusions of control.
,x5—In Partial Remission: Symptoms of a Major Depressive Episode are
present but full criteria are not met, or there is a period without any
significant symptoms of a Major Depressive Episode lasting less than
2 months following the end of the Major Depressive Episode. (If the Major
Depressive Episode was superimposed on Dysthymic Disorder, the diag-
nosis of Dysthymic Disorder alone is given once the full criteria for a Major
Depressive Episode are no longer met.)
.x6—In Full Remission: During the past 2 months, no significant signs
or symptoms of the disturbance were present.
.xO—Unspecified.
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
for Manic Episode
These specifiers apply to a Manic Episode in Bipolar I Disorder only if it is the most
recent type of mood episode. If criteria are currently met for the Manic Episode, it can
be classified as Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features, or Severe With
Psychotic Features. If the criteria are no longer met, the specifier indicates whether the
episode is in partial or full remission. These specifiers are reflected in the fifth-digit
coding for the disorder.
1—Mild, 2—Moderate, 3—Severe Without Psychotic Features. Severity is judged
to be mild, moderate, or severe based on the number of criteria symptoms, the severitySeverity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
379
of the symptoms, the degree of functional disability, and the need for supervision. Mild
episodes are characterized by the presence of only three or four manic symptoms.
Moderate episodes are characterized by an extreme increase in activity or impairment
in judgment. Episodes that are Severe Without Psychotic Features are characterized by
the need for almost continual supervision to protect the individual from harm to self or
others.
4—Severe With Psychotic Features. This specifier indicates the presence of either
delusions or hallucinations (typically auditory). Most commonly, the content of the
delusions or hallucinations is consistent with the manic themes, that is, they are
mood-congruent psych otic features. For example, God's voice may be heard explaining
that the person has a special mission. Persecutory delusions may be based on the idea
that the person is being persecuted because of some special relationship or attribute.
Less commonly, the content of the hallucinations or delusions has no apparent
relationship to manic themes, that is, they are mood-incongruent psychotic features.
These may include persecutory delusions (not directly related to grandiose themes),
delusions of thought insertion (i.e., one's thoughts are not one's own), delusions of
thought broadcasting (i.e., others can hear one's thoughts), and delusions of control
(i.e., one's actions are under outside control). The presence of these features may be
associated with a poorer prognosis. The clinician can indicate the nature of the psychotic
features by specifying With Mood-Congruent Features or With Mood-incongruent
Features.
5—In Partial Remission, 6—In Full Remission. Full Remission requires a period
of at least 2 months in which there are no significant symptoms of mania. There are two
ways for the episode to be In Partial Remission: 1) symptoms of a Manic Episode are
still present, but full criteria are no longer met; or 2) there are no longer any significant
symptoms of a Manic Episode, but the period of remission has been less than 2 months.
Criteria for Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
for current (or most recent) Manic Episode
Note: Code in fifth digit. Can be applied to a Manic Episode in Bipolar I Disorder
only if it is the most recent type of mood episode.
.xl—Mild: Minimum symptom criteria are met for a Manic Episode.
.x2—Moderate: Extreme increase in activity or impairment in judgment.
.x3—Severe Without Psychotic Features: Almost continual supervision
required to prevent physical harm to self or others.
.x4—Severe With Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucinations. If
possible, specify whether the psychotic features are mood-congruent or
mood-incongruent:
Mood-Congruent Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucinations
whose content is entirely consistent with the typical manic themes of
inflated worth, power, knowledge, identity, or special relationship to
a deity or famous person.
(continued)380
Mood Disorders
D Criteria for Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers for
current (or most recent) Manic Episode (continued)
Mood-Incongruent Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucina-
tions whose content does not involve typical manic themes of inflated
worth, power, knowledge, identity, or special relationship to a deity
or famous person. Included are such symptoms as persecutory
delusions (not directly related to grandiose ideas or themes), thought
insertion, and delusions of being controlled.
.x5—In Partial Remission: Symptoms of a Manic Episode are present
but full criteria are not met, or there is a period without any significant
symptoms of a Manic Episode lasting less than 2 months following the end
of the Manic Episode.
.x6—In Full Remission: During the past 2 months no significant signs or
symptoms of the disturbance were present.
.xO—Unspecified.
Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
for Mixed Episode
These specifiers apply to a Mixed Episode in Bipolar I Disorder only if it is the most
recent type of mood episode. If criteria are currently met for the Mixed Episode, it can
be classified as Mild, Moderate, Severe Without Psychotic Features, or Severe With
Psychotic Features. If the criteria are no longer met, the specifier indicates whether the
episode is in partial or full remission. These specifiers are reflected in the fifth-digit
coding for the disorder.
1—Mild, 2—Moderate, 3—Severe Without Psychotic Features. Severity is judged
to be mild, moderate, or severe based on the number of criteria symptoms, the severity
of the symptoms, the degree of functional disability, and the need for supervision. Mild
episodes are characterized by the presence of only three or four manic symptoms and
five or six depressive symptoms. Moderate episodes are characterized by an extreme
increase in activity or impairment in judgment. Episodes that are Severe Without Psychotic
Features are characterized by the need for almost continual supervision to protect the
individual from harm to self or others.
4—Severe With Psychotic Features. This specifier indicates the presence of either
delusions or hallucinations (typically auditory). Most commonly, the content of the
delusions or hallucinations is consistent with either the manic or depressive themes, that
is, they are mood-congruent psychotic features. For example, God's voice may be heard
explaining that the person has a special mission. Persecutory delusions may be based
on the idea that the person is being persecuted because of being especially deserving
of punishment or having some special relationship or attribute.Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
381
Less commonly, the content of the hallucinations or delusions has no apparent
relationship to either manic or depressive themes, that is, they are mood-incongruent
psychotic features. These may include delusions of thought insertion (i.e., one's thoughts
are not one's own), delusions of thought broadcasting (i.e., others can hear one's
thoughts), and delusions of control (i.e., one's actions are under outside control). These
features are associated with a poorer prognosis. The clinician can indicate the nature of
the psychotic features by specifying With Mood-Congruent Features or With Mood-
Incongruent Features.
5—In Partial Remission, 6—In Full Remission. Full Remission requires a period
of at least 2 months in which there are no significant symptoms of mania or depression.
There are two ways for the episode to be In Partial Remission: 1) symptoms of a Mixed
Episode are still present, but full criteria are no longer met; or 2) there are no longer
any significant symptoms of a Mixed Episode, but the period of remission has been less
than 2 months.
Criteria for Severity/Psychotic/Remission Specifiers
for current (or most recent) Mixed Episode
Note: Code in fifth digit. Can be applied to a Mixed Episode in Bipolar I Disorder
only if it is the most recent type of mood episode.
.xl—Mild: No more than minimum symptom criteria are met for both a
Manic Episode and a Major Depressive Episode.
.x2—Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between "mild" and
"severe."
.x3—Severe Without Psychotic Features: Almost continual supervision
required to prevent physical harm to self or others.
.x4—Severe With Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucinations. If
possible, specify whether the psychotic features are mood-congruent or
mood-incongruent:
Mood-Congruent Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucinations
whose content is entirely consistent with the typical manic or depres-
sive themes.
Mood-incongruent Psychotic Features: Delusions or hallucina-
tions whose content does not involve typical manic or depressive
themes. Included are such symptoms as persecutory delusions (not
directly related to grandiose or depressive themes), thought insertion,
and delusions of being controlled.
.x5—In Partial Remission: Symptoms of a Mixed Episode are present
but full criteria are not met, or there is a period without any significant
symptoms of a Mixed Episode lasting less than 2 months following the end
of the Mixed Episode.
.x6—In Full Remission: During the past 2 months, no significant signs
or symptoms of the disturbance were present.
.xO—Unspecified.382
Mood Disorders
Chronic Specifier for a Major Depressive Episode
This specifier indicates the chronic nature of a Major Depressive Episode. This specifier
applies to the current or most recent Major Depressive Episode in Major Depressive
Disorder and to a Major Depressive Episode in Bipolar I or Bipolar II Disorder only if
it is the most recent type of mood episode.
I Criteria for Chronic Specifier
Specify if:
Chronic (can be applied to the current or most recent Major Depressive
Episode in Major Depressive Disorder and to a Major Depressive Episode
in Bipolar I or II Disorder only if it is the most recent type of mood episode)
Full criteria for a Major Depressive Episode have been met continuously for
at least the past 2 years.
Catatonic Features Specifier
The specifier With Catatonic Features can be applied to the current (or most recent)
Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episode in Major Depressive Disorder, Bipolar I
Disorder, or Bipolar II Disorder. The specifier With Catatonic Features is appropriate
when the clinical picture is characterized by marked psychomotor disturbance that may
involve motoric immobility, excessive motor activity, extreme negativism, mutism,
peculiarities of voluntary movement, echolalia, or echopraxia. Motoric immobility may
be manifested by catalepsy (waxy flexibility) or stupor. The excessive motor activity is
apparently purposeless and is not influenced by external stimuli. There may be extreme
negativism that is manifested by the maintenance of a rigid posture against attempts to
be moved or resistance to all instructions. Peculiarities of voluntary movement are
manifested by the assumption of inappropriate or bizarre postures or by prominent
grimacing. Echolalia (the pathological, parrotlike, and apparently senseless repetition of
a word or phrase just spoken by another person) and echopraxia (the repetitive imitation
of the movements of another person) are often present. Additional features may include
stereotypies, mannerisms, and automatic obedience or mimicry. During severe catatonic
stupor or excitement, the person may need careful supervision to avoid self-harm or
harm to others. Potential consequences include malnutrition, exhaustion, hyperpyrexia,
or self-inflicted injury. The differential diagnosis of a Mood Episode With Catatonic
Features includes Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition (p. 169),
Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type (p. 288), or a side effect of a medication (e.g., a
Medication-Induced Movement Disorder, p. 678).Melancholic Features Specifier
383
• Criteria for Catatonic Features Specifier
Specify if:
With Catatonic Features (can be applied to the current or most recent
Major Depressive Episode, Manic Episode, or Mixed Episode in Major
Depressive Disorder, Bipolar I Disorder, or Bipolar II Disorder)
The clinical picture is dominated by at least two of the following:
(1) motoric immobility as evidenced by catalepsy (including waxy
flexibility) or stupor
(2) excessive motor activity (that is apparently purposeless and not
influenced by external stimuli)
(3) extreme negativism (an apparently motiveless resistance to all
instructions or maintenance of a rigid posture against attempts to
be moved) or mutism
(4) peculiarities of voluntary movement as evidenced by posturing
(voluntary assumption of inappropriate or bizarre postures), ste-
reotyped movements, prominent mannerisms, or prominent gri-
macing
(5) echolalia or echopraxia
Melancholic Features Specifier
The specifier With Melancholic Features can be applied to the current (or most recent)
Major Depressive Episode that occurs in the course of Major Depressive Disorder and
to a Major Depressive Episode in Bipolar I or II Disorder only if it is the most recent
type of mood episode. The essential feature of a Major Depressive Episode, With
Melancholic Features is loss of interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities or a
lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli. The individual's depressed mood does
not improve, even temporarily, when something good happens (Criterion A). In addition,
at least three of the following symptoms are present: a distinct quality of the depressed
mood, depression that is regularly worse in the morning, early morning awakening,
psychomotor retardation or agitation, significant anorexia or weight loss, or excessive
or inappropriate guilt (Criterion B).
The specifier With Melancholic Features is applied if these features are present at
the nadir of the episode. There is a near-complete absence of the capacity for pleasure,
not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the lack of reactivity of mood is that,
even for very desired events, the depressed mood does not brighten at all or brightens
only partially (e.g., up to 20%-40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The distinct
quality of mood that is characteristic of the With Melancholic Features specifier is
experienced by individuals as qualitatively different from the sadness experienced during
bereavement or a nonmelancholic depressive episode. This may be elicited by asking
the person to compare the quality of the current depressed mood with the mood
experienced after the death of a loved one. A depressed mood that is described as merely
more severe, longer-lasting, or present without a reason is not considered distinct in
quality. Psychomotor changes are nearly always present and are observable by others.384
Mood Disorders
Individuals with melancholic features are less likely to have a premorbid Personality
Disorder, to have a clear precipitant to the episode, and to respond to a trial of placebo
medication. They are more likely to have responded to antidepressant medications or
electroconvulsive therapy in the past and are also more likely to respond in the current
episode. Melancholic features are encountered equally in both genders, but are more
likely in older individuals. These features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across
episodes in the same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to
outpatients, and are less likely to occur in milder than in more severe Major Depressive
Episodes and are more likely to occur in those with psychotic features. Melancholic
features are more frequently associated with laboratory findings of dexamethasone
nonsuppression, hyperadrenocorticism, reduced rapid eye movement (REM) latency,
abnormal tyramine challenge test, and an abnormal asymmetry on dichotic listening tasks.
I Criteria for Melancholic Features Specifier
Specify if:
With Melancholic Features (can be applied to the current or most recent
Major Depressive Episode in Major Depressive Disorder and to a Major
Depressive Episode in Bipolar I or Bipolar II Disorder only if it is the most
recent type of mood episode)
A. Either of the following, occurring during the most severe period of the
current episode:
(1) loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities
(2) lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much
better, even temporarily, when something good happens)
B. Three (or more) of the following:
(1) distinct quality of depressed mood (i.e., the depressed mood is
experienced as distinctly different from the kind of feeling experi-
enced after the death of a loved one)
(2) depression regularly worse in the morning
(3) early morning awakening (at least 2 hours before usual time of
awakening)
(4) marked psychomotor retardation or agitation
(5) significant anorexia or weight loss
(6) excessive or inappropriate guilt
Atypical Features Specifier
The specifier With Atypical Features can be applied to the current (or most recent) Major
Depressive Episode in Major Depressive Disorder and to a Major Depressive Episode in
Bipolar I or Bipolar II Disorder only if it is the most recent type of mood episode, or to
Dysthymic Disorder. The essential features are mood reactivity (Criterion A) and the
presence of at least two of the following features (Criterion B): increased appetite orAtypical Features Specifier
385
weight gain, hypersomnia, leaden paralysis, and a long-standing pattern of extreme
sensitivity to perceived interpersonal rejection. These features predominate during the most
recent 2-week period (or the most recent 2-year period for Dysthymic Disorder). The
specifier With Atypical Features is not given if the criteria for With Melancholic Features or
With Catatonic Features have been met during the same Major Depressive Episode.
Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive events
(e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become euthymic (not
sad) even for extended periods of time if the external circumstances remain favorable.
Increased appetite may be manifested by an obvious increase in food intake or by weight
gain. Hypersomnia may include either an extended period of nighttime sleep or daytime
napping that totals at least 10 hours of sleep per day (or at least 2 hours more than when
not depressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as feeling heavy, leaden, or weighted down,
usually in the arms or legs; this is generally present for at least an hour a day but often
lasts for many hours at a time. Unlike the other atypical features, pathological sensitivity
to perceived interpersonal rejection is a trait that has an early onset and persists
throughout most of adult life. Rejection sensitivity occurs both when the person is and
is not depressed, though it may be exacerbated during depressive periods. The problems
that result from rejection sensitivity must be significant enough to result in functional
impairment. There may be stormy relationships with frequent disruptions and an inability
to sustain a longer-lasting relationship. The individual's reaction to rebuff or criticism
may be manifested by leaving work early, using substances excessively, or displaying
other clinically significant maladaptive behavioral responses. There may also be avoid-
ance of relationships due to the fear of interpersonal rejection. Being occasionally touchy
or overemotional does not qualify as a manifestation of interpersonal rejection sensitivity.
Personality Disorders (e.g., Avoidant Personality Disorder) and Anxiety Disorders (e.g.,
Separation Anxiety Disorder, Specific Phobia, or Social Phobia) may be more common
in those with atypical features. The laboratory findings associated with a Major
Depressive Episode With Melancholic Features are generally not present in association
with an episode with atypical features.
Atypical features are two to three times more common in women. Individuals with
atypical features report an earlier age at onset of their depressive episodes (e.g., while
in high school) and frequently have a more chronic, less episodic course, with only
partial interepisode recovery. Younger individuals may be more likely to have episodes
with atypical features, whereas older individuals may more often have episodes with
melancholic features. Episodes with atypical features are more common in Bipolar I
Disorder, Bipolar II Disorder, and in Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, occurring in
a seasonal pattern.
I Criteria for Atypical Features Specifier
Specify if:
With Atypical Features (can be applied when these features predominate
during the most recent 2 weeks of a Major Depressive Episode in Major
Depressive Disorder or in Bipolar I or Bipolar II Disorder when the Major
Depressive Episode is the most recent type of mood episode, or when these
features predominate during the most recent 2 years of Dysthymic Disorder)
(continued)386
Mood Disorders
D Criteria for Atypical Features Specifier (continued)
A. Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential
positive events)
B. Two (or more) of the following features:
(1) significant weight gain or increase in appetite
(2) hypersomnia
(3) leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms or legs)
(4) long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not
limited to episodes of mood disturbance) that results in significant
social or occupational impairment
C. Criteria are not met for With Melancholic Features or With Catatonic
Features during the same episode.
Postpartum Onset Specifier
The specifier With Postpartum Onset can be applied to the current (or most recent)
Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episode of Major Depressive Disorder, Bipolar I
Disorder, or Bipolar II Disorder or to Brief Psychotic Disorder (p. 302) if onset is within
4 weeks after delivery of a child. In general, the symptomatology of the postpartum
Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episode does not differ from the symptomatology in
nonpostpartum mood episodes and may include psychotic features. A fluctuating course
and mood lability may be more common in postpartum episodes. When delusions are
present, they often concern the newborn infant (e.g., the newborn is possessed by the
devil, has special powers, or is destined for a terrible fate). In both the psychotic and
nonpsychotic presentations, there may be suicidal ideation, obsessional thoughts
regarding violence to the child, lack of concentration, and psychomotor agitation.
Women with postpartum Major Depressive Episodes often have severe anxiety, Panic
Attacks, spontaneous crying long after the usual duration of "baby blues" (i.e., 3-7 days
postpartum), disinterest in their new infant, and insomnia (more likely to manifest as
difficulty falling asleep than as early morning awakening).
Many women feel especially guilty about having depressive feelings at a time when
they believe they should be happy. They may be reluctant to discuss their symptoms or
their negative feelings toward the child. Less-than-optimal development of the mother-
infant relationship may result from the clinical condition itself or from separations from
the infant. Infanticide is most often associated with postpartum psychotic episodes that
are characterized by command hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that the infant
is possessed, but it can also occur in severe postpartum mood episodes without such
specific delusions or hallucinations. Postpartum mood (Major Depressive, Manic, or
Mixed) episodes with psychotic features appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1000
deliveries and may be more common in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum
episodes with psychotic features is particularly increased for women with prior postpar-
tum mood episodes but is also elevated for those with a prior history of a Mood DisorderLongitudinal Course Specifiers
387
(especially Bipolar I Disorder). Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with
psychotic features, the risk of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30%
and 50%. There is also some evidence of increased risk of postpartum psychotic mood
episodes among women without a history of Mood Disorders with a family history of
Bipolar Disorders. Postpartum episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring
in the postpartum period, which is distinguished by a decreased level of awareness or
attention.
I Criteria for Postpartum Onset Specifier
Specify if:
With Postpartum Onset (can be applied to the current or most recent
Major Depressive, Manic, or Mixed Episode in Major Depressive Disorder,
Bipolar I Disorder, or Bipolar II Disorder; or to Brief Psychotic Disorder)
Onset of episode within 4 weeks postpartum
Specifiers Describing Course of Recurrent Episodes
A number of specifiers for Mood Disorders are provided to increase diagnostic specificity
and create more homogeneous subgroups, assist in treatment selection, and improve
the prediction of prognosis. Specifiers that describe the course of recurrent episodes
include Longitudinal Course Specifiers (With or Without Full Interepisode Recovery),
Seasonal Pattern, and Rapid Cycling. These specifiers cannot be coded. Table 2 indicates
which course specifiers apply to each Mood Disorder (see p. 388).
Longitudinal Course Specifiers
(With and Without Full Interepisode Recovery)
The specifiers With Full Interepisode Recovery and Without Full Interepisode Recovery
are provided to help characterize the course of illness in individuals with Recurrent Major
Depressive Disorder, Bipolar I Disorder, or Bipolar II Disorder. These specifiers should
be applied to the period of time between the two most recent episodes. The character-
ization of course is further enhanced by noting the presence of antecedent Dysthymic
Disorder.
The four graphs below depict prototypical courses. A shows the course of Major
Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, in which there is no antecedent Dysthymic Disorder
and there is a period of full remission between the episodes. This course pattern predicts
the best future prognosis. B shows the course of Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent,
in which there is no antecedent Dysthymic Disorder but in which prominent symptoms
persist between the two most recent episodes—that is, no more than partial remission
is attained. C shows the rare pattern (present in fewer than 3% of individuals with Major
Depressive Disorder) of Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, with antecedent Dysthy-388
Mood Disorders
Table 2. Course specifiers that apply to Mood Disorders
Major Depressive Disorder,
Single Episode
Major Depressive Disorder,
Recurrent
Dysthymic Disorder
Bipolar I Disorder,
Single Manic Episode
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Hypomanic
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Manic
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Mixed
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Depressed
Bipolar I Disorder,
Most Recent Episode Unspecified
Bipolar II Disorder,
Hypomanic
Bipolar II Disorder,
Depressed
Cyclothymic Disorder
With/Without
Interepisode
Recovery Seasonal
Pattern X X X X X
X X X
X X X
X X X
X X X
X X X
X X X
Rapid
Cycling
mic Disorder but with full interepisode recovery between the two most recent episodes.
D shows the course of Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, in which there is antecedent
Dysthymic Disorder and in which there is no period of full remission between the two
most recent episodes. This pattern, commonly referred to as "double depression" (see
p. 346), is seen in about 20%-25% of individuals with Major Depressive Disorder.
In general, individuals with a history of Without Full Interepisode Recovery between
episodes have a persistence of that pattern between subsequent episodes. They also
appear more likely to have more Major Depressive Episodes than those with full
interepisode recovery. Dysthymic Disorder prior to the first episode of Major Depressive
Disorder is most likely to be associated with lack of full interepisode recovery
subsequently. These specifiers may also be applied to the period of time between the
most recent mood episodes in Bipolar I Disorder or Bipolar II Disorder to indicate
presence or absence of mood symptomatology.
A. Recurrent, with full interepisode recovery, with no
Dysthymic Disorder
B. Recurrent, without full interepisode recovery, with
no Dysthymic Disorder
C. Recurrent, with full interepisode recovery, super-
imposed on Dysthymic Disorder (also code 300.4)
D. Recurrent, without full interepisode recovery, super-
imposed on Dysthymic Disorder (also code 300.4)Seasonal Pattern Specifier
389
I Criteria for Longitudinal Course Specifiers
Specify if (can be applied to Recurrent Major Depressive Disorder or Bipolar 1
or II Disorder):
With Full Interepisode Recovery: if full remission is attained between
the two most recent Mood Episodes
Without Full Interepisode Recovery: if full remission is not attained
between the two most recent Mood Episodes
Seasonal Pattern
Specifier
The specifier With Seasonal Pattern can be applied to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes in Bipolar I Disorder, Bipolar II Disorder, or Major Depressive Disorder,
Recurrent. The essential feature is the onset and remission of Major Depressive Episodes
at characteristic times of the year. In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and
remit in spring. Less commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive episodes.
This pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during the last
2 years, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during this period. In addition, the
seasonal depressive episodes must substantially outnumber any nonseasonal depressive
episodes over the individual's lifetime. This specifier does not apply to those situations
in which the pattern is better explained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g.,
seasonal unemployment or school schedule). Major Depressive Episodes that occur in
a seasonal pattern are often characterized by prominent anergy, hypersomnia, over-
eating, weight gain, and a craving for carbohydrates. It is unclear whether a seasonal
pattern is more likely in Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, or in Bipolar Disorders.
However, within the Bipolar Disorders group, a seasonal pattern appears to be more
likely in Bipolar II Disorder than in Bipolar I Disorder. In some individuals, the onset
of Manic or Hypomanic Episodes may also be linked to a particular season. Bright
visible-spectrum light used in treatment may be associated with switches into Manic or
Hypomanic Episodes.
The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude, age,
and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is also a strong predictor of
seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive episodes. Women
comprise 60%-90% of persons with seasonal pattern, but it is unclear whether female
gender is a specific risk factor over and above the risk associated with recurrent Major
Depressive Disorder. Although this specifier applies to seasonal occurrence of full Major
Depressive Episodes, some research suggests that a seasonal pattern may also describe
the presentation in some individuals with recurrent winter depressive episodes that do
not meet criteria for a Major Depressive Episode.390
Mood Disorders
I Criteria for Seasonal Pattern Specifier
Specify if:
With Seasonal Pattern (can be applied to the pattern of Major Depressive
Episodes in Bipolar I Disorder, Bipolar II Disorder, or Major Depressive
Disorder, Recurrent)
A. There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of
Major Depressive Episodes in Bipolar I or Bipolar II Disorder or Major
Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, and a particular time of the year (e.g.,
regular appearance of the Major Depressive Episode in the fall or
winter).
Note: Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonal-
related psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every winter).
B. Full remissions (or a change from depression to mania or hypomania)
also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression disappears
in the spring).
C. In the last 2 years, two Major Depressive Episodes have occurred that
demonstrate the temporal seasonal relationships defined in Criteria A
and B, and no nonseasonal Major Depressive Episodes have occurred
during that same period.
D. Seasonal Major Depressive Episodes (as described above) substantially
outnumber the nonseasonal Major Depressive Episodes that may have
occurred over the individual's lifetime.
Rapid-Cycling Specifier
The specifier With Rapid Cycling can be applied to Bipolar I Disorder or Bipolar II
Disorder. The essential feature of a rapid-cycling Bipolar Disorder is the occurrence of
four or more mood episodes during the previous 12 months. These episodes can occur
in any combination and order. The episodes must meet both the duration and symptom
criteria for a Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode and must be
demarcated by either a period of full remission or by a switch to an episode of the
opposite polarity. Manic, Hypomanic, and Mixed Episodes are counted as being on the
same pole (e.g., a Manic Episode immediately followed by a Mixed Episode counts as
only one episode in considering the specifier With Rapid Cycling). Except for the fact
that they occur more frequently, the episodes that occur in a rapid-cycling pattern are
no different from those that occur in a non-rapid-cycling pattern. Mood episodes that
count toward defining a rapid-cycling pattern exclude those episodes directly caused by
a substance (e.g., cocaine, corticosteroids) or a general medical condition.
Rapid cycling occurs in approximately 5%-15% of persons with Bipolar Disorder
seen in mood disorders clinics. Whereas in Bipolar Disorder in general the sex ratio is
equal, women comprise 70%-90% of individuals with a rapid-cycling pattern. The moodRapid-Cycling Specifier
391
episodes are not linked to any phase of the menstrual cycle and occur in both pre- and
postmenopausal women. Rapid cycling may be associated with hypothyroidism, certain
neurological conditions (e.g., multiple sclerosis), Mental Retardation, head injury, or
antidepressant treatment. Rapid cycling can occur at any time during the course of
Bipolar Disorder and may appear and disappear, particularly if it is associated with
antidepressant use. The development of rapid cycling is associated with a poorer
longer-term prognosis.
I Criteria for Rapid-Cycling Specifier
Specify if:
With Rapid Cycling (can be applied to Bipolar I Disorder or Bipolar II
Disorder)
At least four episodes of a mood disturbance in the previous 12 months that
meet criteria for a Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode.
Note: Episodes are demarcated either by partial or full remission for at least
2 months or a switch to an episode of opposite polarity (e.g., Major Depressive
Episode to Manic Episode).This page intentionally left blankAnxiety Disorders
T
he following disorders are contained in this section: Panic Disorder Without
Agoraphobia, Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia, Agoraphobia Without History of
Panic Disorder, Specific Phobia, Social Phobia, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Post-
traumatic Stress Disorder, Acute Stress Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Anxiety
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder, and
Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. Because Panic Attacks and Agoraphobia
occur in the context of several of these disorders, criteria sets for a Panic Attack and for
Agoraphobia are listed separately at the beginning of this section.
A Panic Attack is a discrete period in which there is the sudden onset of intense
apprehension, fearfulness, or terror, often associated with feelings of impending doom.
During these attacks, symptoms such as shortness of breath, palpitations, chest pain or
discomfort, choking or smothering sensations, and fear of "going crazy" or losing control
are present.
Agoraphobia is anxiety about, or avoidance of, places or situations from which
escape might be difficult (or embarrassing) or in which help may not be available in the
event of having a Panic Attack or panic-like symptoms.
Panic Disorder Without Agoraphobia is characterized by recurrent unexpected
Panic Attacks about which there is persistent concern. Panic Disorder With Agora-
phobia is characterized by both recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks and Agoraphobia.
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder is characterized by the presence
of Agoraphobia and panic-like symptoms without a history of unexpected Panic Attacks.
Specific Phobia is characterized by clinically significant anxiety provoked by
exposure to a specific feared object or situation, often leading to avoidance behavior.
Social Phobia is characterized by clinically significant anxiety provoked by
exposure to certain types of social or performance situations, often leading to avoidance
behavior.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is characterized by obsessions (which cause
marked anxiety or distress) and/or by compulsions (which serve to neutralize anxiety).
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder is characterized by the reexperiencing of an
extremely traumatic event accompanied by symptoms of increased arousal and by
avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma.
Acute Stress Disorder is characterized by symptoms similar to those of Posttrau-
matic Stress Disorder that occur immediately in the aftermath of an extremely traumatic
event.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder is characterized by at least 6 months of persistent
and excessive anxiety and worry.
393394
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is characterized by
prominent symptoms of anxiety that are judged to be a direct physiological consequence
of a general medical condition.
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder is characterized by prominent symptoms
of anxiety that are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a drug of abuse,
a medication, or toxin exposure.
Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding disorders with
prominent anxiety or phobic avoidance that do not meet criteria for any of the specific
Anxiety Disorders defined in this section (or anxiety symptoms about which there is
inadequate or contradictory information).
Because Separation Anxiety Disorder (characterized by anxiety related to separation
from parental figures) usually develops in childhood, it is included in the "Disorders
Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence" section (see p. 110).
Phobic avoidance that is limited to genital sexual contact with a sexual partner is classified
as Sexual Aversion Disorder and is included in the "Sexual and Gender Identity
Disorders" section (see p. 499).
Panic Attack
Features
Because Panic Attacks occur in the context of several different Anxiety Disorders, the
text and criteria set for a Panic Attack are provided separately in this section. The essential
feature of a Panic Attack is a discrete period of intense fear or discomfort that is
accompanied by at least 4 of 13 somatic or cognitive symptoms. The attack has a sudden
onset and builds to a peak rapidly (usually in 10 minutes or less) and is often
accompanied by a sense of imminent danger or impending doom and an urge to escape.
The 13 somatic or cognitive symptoms are palpitations, sweating, trembling or shaking,
sensations of shortness of breath or smothering, feeling of choking, chest pain or
discomfort, nausea or abdominal distress, dizziness or lightheadedness, derealization or
depersonalization, fear of losing control or "going crazy," fear of dying, paresthesias,
and chills or hot flushes. Attacks that meet all other criteria but that have fewer than
4 somatic or cognitive symptoms are referred to as limited-symptom attacks.
Individuals seeking care for unexpected Panic Attacks will usually describe the fear
as intense and report that they thought they were about to die, lose control, have a heart
attack or stroke, or "go crazy." They also usually report an urgent desire to flee from
wherever the attack is occurring. With recurrent attacks, some of the intense fearfulness
may wane. Shortness of breath is a common symptom in Panic Attacks associated with
Panic Disorder With and Without Agoraphobia. Blushing is common in situationally
bound Panic Attacks related to social or performance anxiety. The anxiety that is
characteristic of a Panic Attack can be differentiated from generalized anxiety by its
intermittent, almost paroxysmal nature and its typically greater severity.
Panic Attacks can occur in a variety of Anxiety Disorders (e.g., Panic Disorder, Social
Phobia, Specific Phobia, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, Acute Stress Disorder). In
determining the differential diagnostic significance of a Panic Attack, it is important to
consider the context in which the Panic Attack occurs. There are three characteristic
types of Panic Attacks with different relationships between the onset of the attack and
the presence or absence of situational triggers: unexpected (uncued) Panic Attacks,Panic Attack
395
in which the onset of the Panic Attack is not associated with a situational trigger (i.e.,
occurring spontaneously "out of the blue"); situationally bound (cued) Panic Attacks,
in which the Panic Attack almost invariably occurs immediately on exposure to, or in
anticipation of, the situational cue or trigger (e.g., seeing a snake or dog always triggers
an immediate Panic Attack); and situationally predisposed Panic Attacks, which are
more likely to occur on exposure to the situational cue or trigger, but are not invariably
associated with the cue and do not necessarily occur immediately after the exposure
(e.g., attacks are more likely to occur while driving, but there are times when the
individual drives and does not have a Panic Attack or times when the Panic Attack occurs
after driving for a half hour).
The occurrence of unexpected Panic Attacks is required for a diagnosis of Panic
Disorder (with or without Agoraphobia). Situationally bound Panic Attacks are most
characteristic of Social and Specific Phobias. Situationally predisposed Panic Attacks are
especially frequent in Panic Disorder but may at times occur in Specific Phobia or Social
Phobia. The differential diagnosis of Panic Attacks is complicated by the fact that an
exclusive relationship does not always exist between the diagnosis and the type of Panic
Attack. For instance, although Panic Disorder definitionally requires that at least some
of the Panic Attacks be unexpected, individuals with Panic Disorder frequently report
having situationally bound attacks, particularly later in the course of the disorder. The
diagnostic issues for boundary cases are discussed in the "Differential Diagnosis" sections
of the texts for the disorders in which Panic Attacks may appear.
Criteria for Panic Attack
Note: A Panic Attack is not a codable disorder. Code the specific diagnosis in
which the Panic Attack occurs (e.g., 300.21 Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia
[p. 402]).
A discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in which four (or more) of
the following symptoms developed abruptly and reached a peak within
10 minutes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate
sweating
trembling or shaking
sensations of shortness of breath or smothering
feeling of choking
chest pain or discomfort
nausea or abdominal distress
feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint
derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization
(being detached from oneself)
(10) fear of losing control or going crazy
(11) fear of dying
(12) paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations)
(13) chills or hot flushes396
Anxiety Disorders
Agoraphobia
Features
Because Agoraphobia occurs in the context of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia and
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder, the text and criteria set for Agoraphobia
are provided separately in this section. The essential feature of Agoraphobia is anxiety
about being in places or situations from which escape might be difficult (or embarrassing)
or in which help may not be available in the event of having a Panic Attack (see p. 394)
or panic-like symptoms (e.g., fear of having a sudden attack of dizziness or a sudden
attack of diarrhea) (Criterion A). The anxiety typically leads to a pervasive avoidance of
a variety of situations that may include being alone outside the home or being home
alone; being in a crowd of people; traveling in a automobile, bus, or airplane; or being
on a bridge or in an elevator. Some individuals are able to expose themselves to the
feared situations but endure these experiences with considerable dread. Often an
individual is better able to confront a feared situation when accompanied by a
companion (Criterion B). Individuals' avoidance of situations may impair their ability to
travel to work or to carry out homemaking responsibilities (e.g., grocery shopping, taking
children to the doctor). The anxiety or phobic avoidance is not better accounted for by
another mental disorder (Criterion C). The differential diagnosis to distinguish Agora-
phobia from Social and Specific Phobia and from severe Separation Anxiety Disorder
can be difficult because all of these conditions are characterized by avoidance of specific
situations. The diagnostic issues for boundary cases are discussed in the "Differential
Diagnosis" sections of the texts for the disorders in which avoidant behavior is an
essential or associated feature.
Criteria for Agoraphobia
Note: Agoraphobia is not a codable disorder. Code the specific disorder in which
the Agoraphobia occurs (e.g., 300.21 Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia [p. 402] or
300.22 Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder [p. 404]).
A. Anxiety about being in places or situations from which escape might be
difficult (or embarrassing) or in which help may not be available in the
event of having an unexpected or situationally predisposed Panic Attack
or panic-like symptoms. Agoraphobic fears typically involve character-
istic clusters of situations that include being outside the home alone;
being in a crowd or standing in a line; being on a bridge; and traveling
in a bus, train, or automobile.
Note: Consider the diagnosis of Specific Phobia if the avoidance is limited to
one or only a few specific situations, or Social Phobia if the avoidance is limited
to social situations.
B. The situations are avoided (e.g., travel is restricted) or else are endured
with marked distress or with anxiety about having a Panic Attack or
panic-like symptoms, or require the presence of a companion.
(continued)Panic Disorder
397
D Criteria for Agoraphobia (continued)
C. The anxiety or phobic avoidance is not better accounted for by another
mental disorder, such as Social Phobia (e.g., avoidance limited to social
situations because of fear of embarrassment), Specific Phobia (e.g.,
avoidance limited to a single situation like elevators), Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder (e.g., avoidance of dirt in someone with an
obsession about contamination), Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (e.g.,
avoidance of stimuli associated with a severe stressor), or Separation
Anxiety Disorder (e.g., avoidance of leaving home or relatives).
Panic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Panic Disorder is the presence of recurrent, unexpected Panic
Attacks (see p. 394) followed by at least 1 month of persistent concern about having
another Panic Attack, worry about the possible implications or consequences of the
Panic Attacks, or a significant behavioral change related to the attacks (Criterion A). The
Panic Attacks are not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., Caffeine
Intoxication) or a general medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism) (Criterion C). Finally,
the Panic Attacks are not better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., Specific
or Social Phobia, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, or
Separation Anxiety Disorder) (Criterion D). Depending on whether criteria are also met
for Agoraphobia (see p. 396), 300.21 Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia or 300.01 Panic
Disorder Without Agoraphobia is diagnosed (Criterion B).
An unexpected (spontaneous, uncued) Panic Attack is defined as one that is not
associated with a situational trigger (i.e., it occurs "out of the blue"). At least two
unexpected Panic Attacks are required for the diagnosis, but most individuals have
considerably more. Individuals with Panic Disorder frequently also have situationally
predisposed Panic Attacks (i.e., those more likely to occur on, but not invariably
associated with, exposure to a situational trigger). Situationally bound attacks (i.e., those
that occur almost invariably and immediately on exposure to a situational trigger) can
occur but are less common.
The frequency and severity of the Panic Attacks vary widely. For example, some
individuals have moderately frequent attacks (e.g., once a week) that occur regularly
for months at a time. Others report short bursts of more frequent attacks (e.g., daily for
a week) separated by weeks or months without any attacks or with less frequent attacks
(e.g., two each month) over many years. Limited-symptom attacks (i.e., attacks that are
identical to "full" Panic Attacks except that the sudden fear or anxiety is accompanied
by fewer than 4 of the 13 additional symptoms) are very common in individuals with
Panic Disorder. Although the distinction between full Panic Attacks and limited-symptom
attacks is somewhat arbitrary, full Panic Attacks are associated with greater morbidity.
Most individuals who have limited-symptom attacks have had full Panic Attacks at some
time during the course of the disorder.
Individuals with Panic Disorder display characteristic concerns or attributions about398
Anxiety Disorders
the implications or consequences of the Panic Attacks. Some fear that the attacks indicate
the presence of an undiagnosed, life-threatening illness (e.g., cardiac disease, seizure
disorder). Despite repeated medical testing and reassurance, they may remain frightened
and unconvinced that they do not have a life-threatening illness. Others fear that the
Panic Attacks are an indication that they are "going crazy" or losing control or are
emotionally weak. Some individuals with recurrent Panic Attacks significantly change
their behavior (e.g., quit a job) in response to the attacks, but deny either fear of having
another attack or concerns about the consequences of their Panic Attacks. Concerns
about the next attack, or its implications, are often associated with development of
avoidant behavior that may meet criteria for Agoraphobia (see p. 396), in which case
Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia is diagnosed.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. In addition to worry about
Panic Attacks and their implications, many individuals with Panic Disorder also report
constant or intermittent feelings of anxiety that are not focused on any specific situation
or event. Others become excessively apprehensive about the outcome of routine
activities and experiences, particularly those related to health or separation from loved
ones. For example, individuals with Panic Disorder often anticipate a catastrophic
outcome from a mild physical symptom or medication side effect (e.g., thinking that a
headache indicates a brain tumor or a hypertensive crisis). Such individuals are also
much less tolerant of medication side effects and generally need continued reassurance
in order to take medication. In individuals whose Panic Disorder has not been treated
or was misdiagnosed, the belief that they have an undetected life-threatening illness may
lead to both chronic debilitating anxiety and excessive visits to health care facilities. This
pattern can be both emotionally and financially disruptive.
In some cases, loss or disruption of important interpersonal relationships (e.g.,
leaving home to live on one's own, divorce) is associated with the onset or exacerbation
of Panic Disorder. Demoralization is a common consequence, with many individuals
becoming discouraged, ashamed, and unhappy about the difficulties of carrying out their
normal routines. They often attribute this problem to a lack of "strength" or "character."
This demoralization can become generalized to areas beyond specific panic-related
problems. These individuals may frequently be absent from work or school for doctor
and emergency-room visits, which can lead to unemployment or dropping out of school.
Major Depressive Disorder occurs frequently (50%-65%) in individuals with Panic
Disorder. In approximately one-third of individuals with both disorders, the depression
precedes the onset of Panic Disorder. In the remaining two-thirds, depression occurs
coincident with or following the onset of Panic Disorder. A subset of individuals, some of
whom may develop a Substance-Related Disorder as a consequence, treat their anxiety with
alcohol or medications. Comorbidity with other Anxiety Disorders is also common, especially
in clinical settings and in individuals with more severe Agoraphobia (Social Phobia has been
reported in 15%-30% of individuals with Panic Disorder; Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
in 8%-10%; Specific Phobia in 10%-20%; and Generalized Anxiety Disorder in 25%).
Separation Anxiety Disorder in childhood has been associated with this disorder.
Associated laboratory findings. No laboratory findings have been identified that
are diagnostic of Panic Disorder. However, a variety of laboratory findings have been
noted to be abnormal in groups of individuals with Panic Disorder relative to controlPanic Disorder
399
subjects. Some individuals with Panic Disorder show signs of compensated respiratory
alkalosis (i.e., decreased carbon dioxide and decreased bicarbonate levels with an almost
normal pH). Panic Attacks in response to sodium lactate infusion or carbon dioxide
inhalation are more common in Panic Disorder than in other Anxiety Disorders.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Transient tachycardia and moderate elevation of systolic blood pressure may occur
during some Panic Attacks. Although studies have suggested that both mitral valve
prolapse and thyroid disease are more common among individuals with Panic Disorder
than in the general population, others have found no differences in prevalence.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
In some cultures, Panic Attacks may involve intense fear of witchcraft or magic. Panic
Disorder as described here has been found in epidemiological studies throughout the
world. Moreover, a number of conditions included in the "Glossary of Culture-Bound
Syndromes" (see Appendix I) may be related to Panic Disorder. Some cultural or ethnic
groups restrict the participation of women in public life, and this must be distinguished
from Agoraphobia. Panic Disorder Without Agoraphobia is diagnosed twice as often and
Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia three times as often in women as in men.
Prevalence
Epidemiological studies throughout the world consistently indicate the lifetime preva-
lence of Panic Disorder (With or Without Agoraphobia) to be between 1.5% and 3-5%.
One-year prevalence rates are between 1% and 2%. Approximately one-third to one-half
of individuals diagnosed with Panic Disorder in community samples also have Agora-
phobia, although a much higher rate of Agoraphobia is encountered in clinical samples.
Course
Age at onset for Panic Disorder varies considerably, but is most typically between late
adolescence and the mid-30s. There may be a bimodal distribution, with one peak in
late adolescence and a second smaller peak in the mid-30s. A small number of cases
begin in childhood, and onset after age 45 years is unusual but can occur. Retrospective
descriptions by individuals seen in clinical settings suggest that the usual course is
chronic but waxing and waning. Some individuals may have episodic outbreaks with
years of remission in between, and others may have continuous severe symptomatology.
Although Agoraphobia may develop at any point, its onset is usually within the first year
of occurrence of recurrent Panic Attacks. The course of Agoraphobia and its relationship
to the course of Panic Attacks are variable. In some cases, a decrease or remission of
Panic Attacks may be followed closely by a corresponding decrease in agoraphobic
avoidance and anxiety. In others, Agoraphobia may become chronic regardless of the
presence or absence of Panic Attacks. Some individuals report that they can reduce the
frequency of Panic Attacks by avoiding certain situations. Naturalistic follow-up studies
of individuals treated in tertiary care settings (which may select for a poor-prognosis
group) suggest that, at 6-10 years posttreatment, about 30% of individuals are well,
40%-50% are improved but symptomatic, and the remaining 20%-30% have symptoms
that are the same or slightly worse.400
Anxiety Disorders
Familial Pattern
First-degree biological relatives of individuals with Panic Disorder have a four to seven
times greater chance of developing Panic Disorder. However, in clinical settings, as many
as one-half to three-quarters of individuals with Panic Disorder do not have an affected
first-degree biological relative. Twin studies indicate a genetic contribution to the
development of Panic Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
Panic Disorder is not diagnosed if the Panic Attacks are judged to be a direct physiological
consequence of a general medical condition, in which case an Anxiety Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition is diagnosed (see p. 436). Examples of general medical
conditions that can cause Panic Attacks include hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism,
pheochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure disorders, and cardiac conditions
(e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia). Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g.,
serum calcium levels for hyperparathyroidism) or physical examinations (e.g., for cardiac
conditions) may be helpful in determining the etiological role of a general medical
condition. Panic Disorder is not diagnosed if the Panic Attacks are judged to be a direct
physiological consequence of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication), in which
case a Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder is diagnosed (see p. 439). Intoxication
with central nervous system stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines, caffeine) or
cannabis and withdrawal from central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol,
barbiturates) can precipitate a Panic Attack. However, if Panic Attacks continue to occur
outside of the context of substance use (e.g., long after the effects of intoxication or
withdrawal have ended), a diagnosis of Panic Disorder should be considered. Features
such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a Panic
Attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, headaches,
slurred speech, or amnesia) suggest the possibility that a general medical condition or
a substance may be causing the Panic Attack symptoms.
Panic Disorder must be distinguished from other mental disorders (e.g., other
Anxiety Disorders and Psychotic Disorders) that have Panic Attacks as an associated
feature. By definition, Panic Disorder is characterized by recurrent, unexpected (spon-
taneous, uncued, "out of the blue") Panic Attacks. As discussed earlier (see p. 394), there
are three types of Panic Attacks—unexpected, situationally bound, and situationally
predisposed. The presence of recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks either initially or later
in the course is required for the diagnosis of Panic Disorder. In contrast, Panic Attacks
that occur in the context of other Anxiety Disorders are situationally bound or
situationally predisposed (e.g., in Social Phobia cued by social situations; in Specific
Phobia cued by an object or situation; in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder cued by
exposure to the object of an obsession [e.g., exposure to dirt in someone with an
obsession about contamination]; in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder cued by stimuli
recalling the stressor).
The focus of the anxiety also helps to differentiate Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia
from other disorders characterized by avoidant behaviors. Agoraphobic avoidance is
associated with the fear of having a Panic Attack, whereas avoidance in other disorders is
associated with specific situations (e.g., fears of scrutiny, humiliation, and embarrassment
in Social Phobia; fears of heights, elevators, or crossing bridges in Specific Phobia; separation
concerns in Separation Anxiety Disorder; persecution fears in Delusional Disorder).Panic Disorder
401
Differentiation of Specific Phobia, Situational Type, from Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia may be particularly difficult because both disorders may include Panic
Attacks and avoidance of similar types of situations (e.g., driving, flying, public
transportation, enclosed places). Prototypically, Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia is
characterized by the initial onset of unexpected Panic Attacks and the subsequent
avoidance of multiple situations thought to be likely triggers of the Panic Attacks.
Prototypically, Specific Phobia, Situational Type, is characterized by situational avoid-
ance in the absence of recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks. Some presentations fall
between these prototypes and require clinical judgment in the selection of the most
appropriate diagnosis. Four factors can be helpful in making this judgment: the focus
of fear, the type and number of Panic Attacks, the number of situations avoided, and
the level of intercurrent anxiety. For example, an individual who had not previously
feared or avoided elevators has a Panic Attack in an elevator and begins to dread going
to work because of the need to take the elevator to his office on the 24th floor. If this
individual subsequently has Panic Attacks only in elevators (even if the focus of fear is
on the Panic Attack), then a diagnosis of Specific Phobia may be appropriate. If, however,
the individual experiences unexpected Panic Attacks in other situations and begins to
avoid or endure with dread other situations because of fear of a Panic Attack, then a
diagnosis of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia would be warranted. Furthermore, the
presence of pervasive apprehension about having a Panic Attack even when not
anticipating exposure to a phobic situation also supports a diagnosis of Panic Disorder
With Agoraphobia. If the individual has additional unexpected Panic Attacks in other
situations but no additional avoidance or endurance with dread develops, then the
appropriate diagnosis would be Panic Disorder Without Agoraphobia. If the focus of
avoidance is not related to having a Panic Attack but concerns some other catastrophe
(e.g., injury due to the elevator cable breaking), then an additional diagnosis of Specific
Phobia may be considered.
Similarly, distinguishing between Social Phobia and Panic Disorder With Agorapho-
bia can be difficult, especially when there is avoidance only of social situations. The
focus of fear and the type of Panic Attacks can be helpful in making this distinction. For
example, an individual who had not previously had a fear of public speaking has a
Panic Attack while giving a talk and begins to dread giving presentations. If this individual
subsequently has Panic Attacks only in social performance situations (even if the focus
of fear is on the possibility of having another Panic Attack), then a diagnosis of Social
Phobia may be appropriate. If, however, the individual continues to experience
unexpected Panic Attacks in other situations, then a diagnosis of Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia would be warranted. Individuals with Social Phobia fear scrutiny and rarely
have a Panic Attack when alone, whereas individuals with Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia may be more anxious in situations where they must be without a trusted
companion. In addition, nocturnal Panic Attacks that awaken an individual from sleep
are characteristic of Panic Disorder.
When criteria are met for both Panic Disorder and another Anxiety or Mood Disorder,
both disorders should be diagnosed. However, if unexpected Panic Attacks occur in the
context of another disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder or Generalized Anxiety
Disorder) but are not accompanied by a month or more of fear of having additional
attacks, associated concerns, or behavior change, the additional diagnosis of Panic
Disorder is not made. Because individuals with Panic Disorder may self-medicate their
symptoms, comorbid Substance-Related Disorders (most notably related to cannabis,
alcohol, and cocaine) are not uncommon.402
Anxiety Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for 300.01 Panic Disorder Without
Agoraphobia
A. Both (1) and (2):
(1) recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks (see p. 395)
(2) at least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month (or more)
of one (or more) of the following:
(a) persistent concern about having additional attacks
(b) worry about the implications of the attack or its consequences
(e.g., losing control, having a heart attack, "going crazy")
(c) a significant change in behavior related to the attacks
B. Absence of Agoraphobia (see p. 396).
C. The Panic Attacks are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
D. The Panic Attacks are not better accounted for by another mental
disorder, such as Social Phobia (e.g., occurring on exposure to feared
social situations), Specific Phobia (e.g., on exposure to a specific phobic
situation), Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (e.g., on exposure to dirt in
someone with an obsession about contamination), Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (e.g., in response to stimuli associated with a severe stressor),
or Separation Anxiety Disorder (e.g., in response to being away from
home or close relatives).
Diagnostic criteria for 300.21 Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia
A. Both (1) and (2):
(1) recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks (see p. 395)
(2) at least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month (or more)
of one (or more) of the following:
(a) persistent concern about having additional attacks
(b) worry about the implications of the attack or its consequences
(e.g., losing control, having a heart attack, "going crazy")
(c) a significant change in behavior related to the attacks
B. The presence of Agoraphobia (see p. 396).
C. The Panic Attacks are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
(continued)300.22 Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder
403
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.21 Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia (continued)
D. The Panic Attacks are not better accounted for by another mental
disorder, such as Social Phobia (e.g., occurring on exposure to feared
social situations), Specific Phobia (e.g., on exposure to a specific phobic
situation), Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (e.g., on exposure to dirt in
someone with an obsession about contamination), Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (e.g., in response to stimuli associated with a severe stressor),
or Separation Anxiety Disorder (e.g., in response to being away from
home or close relatives).
300.22 Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder are similar to
those of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia except that the focus of fear is on the
occurrence of incapacitating or extremely embarrassing panic-like symptoms or limited-
symptom attacks rather than full Panic Attacks. Individuals with this disorder have
Agoraphobia (see p. 396) (Criterion A). The "panic-like symptoms" include any of the
13 symptoms listed for Panic Attack (see p. 394) or other symptoms that may be
incapacitating or embarrassing (e.g., loss of bladder control). For example, an individual
may be afraid to leave home because of a fear of becoming dizzy, fainting, and then
being left helpless on the ground. To qualify for this diagnosis, the full criteria for Panic
Disorder must never have been met (Criterion B) and the symptoms must not be due
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication)
or a general medical condition (Criterion C). If an associated general medical condition
is present (e.g., a cardiac condition), the fear of being incapacitated or embarrassed by
the development of symptoms (e.g., fainting) is clearly in excess of that usually associated
with the condition (Criterion D).
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Some cultural or ethnic groups restrict the participation of women in public life, and
this must be distinguished from Agoraphobia. This disorder is diagnosed far more often
in females than in males.
Prevalence
In clinical settings, almost all individuals (over 95%) who present with Agoraphobia also
have a current diagnosis (or history) of Panic Disorder. In contrast, the prevalence of
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder in epidemiological samples has been
reported to be higher than that for Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia. However, problems404
Anxiety Disorders
with assessment appear to have inflated the rates reported in epidemiological studies.
Recently, individuals who were given a diagnosis of Agoraphobia Without History of
Panic Disorder in an epidemiological study were reevaluated by clinicians using standard
interview schedules. The majority were found to have Specific Phobias, but not
Agoraphobia.
Course
Relatively little is known about the course of Agoraphobia Without History of Panic
Disorder. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some cases may persist for years and be
associated with considerable impairment.
Differential
Diagnosis
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder is distinguished from Panic Disorder
With Agoraphobia by the absence of a history of recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks.
The avoidance in Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder results from fear of
incapacitation or humiliation due to unpredictable, sudden, panic-like symptoms rather
than from fear of a full Panic Attack as in Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia. The diagnosis
of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia remains appropriate in cases in which Panic Attacks
go into remission but Agoraphobia continues to be experienced.
Other reasons for avoidance must also be distinguished from Agoraphobia Without
History of Panic Disorder. In Social Phobia, individuals avoid social or performance
situations in which they fear that they might act in a way that is humiliating or
embarrassing. In Specific Phobia, the individual avoids a specific feared object or
situation. In Major Depressive Disorder, the individual may avoid leaving home due
to apathy, loss of energy, and anhedonia. Persecutory fears (as in Delusional Disorder)
and fears of contamination (as in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder) can also lead to
widespread avoidance. In Separation Anxiety Disorder, children avoid situations that
take them away from home or close relatives.
Individuals with certain general medical conditions may avoid situations due to
realistic concerns about being incapacitated (e.g., fainting in an individual with
transient ischemic attacks) or being embarrassed (e.g., diarrhea in an individual with
Crohn's disease). The diagnosis of Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder
should be given only if the fear or avoidance is clearly in excess of that usually associated
with the general medical condition.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.22 Agoraphobia Without
History of Panic Disorder
A. The presence of Agoraphobia (see p. 396) related to fear of developing
panic-like symptoms (e.g., dizziness or diarrhea).
B. Criteria have never been met for Panic Disorder (see p. 402).
(continued)300.29 Specific Phobia
405
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.22 Agoraphobia Without History
of Panic Disorder (continued)
C. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
D. If an associated general medical condition is present, the fear described
in Criterion A is clearly in excess of that usually associated with the
condition.
300.29 Specific Phobia
(formerly Simple Phobia)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Specific Phobia is marked and persistent fear of clearly
discernible, circumscribed objects or situations (Criterion A). Exposure to the phobic
stimulus almost invariably provokes an immediate anxiety response (Criterion B). This
response may take the form of a situationally bound or situationally predisposed Panic
Attack (see p. 394). Although adolescents and adults with this disorder recognize that
their fear is excessive or unreasonable (Criterion C), this may not be the case with
children. Most often, the phobic stimulus is avoided, although it is sometimes endured
with dread (Criterion D). The diagnosis is appropriate only if the avoidance, fear, or
anxious anticipation of encountering the phobic stimulus interferes significantly with the
person's daily routine, occupational functioning, or social life, or if the person is markedly
distressed about having the phobia (Criterion E). In individuals under age 18 years,
symptoms must have persisted for at least 6 months before Specific Phobia is diagnosed
(Criterion F). The anxiety, Panic Attacks, or phobic avoidance are not better accounted
for by another mental disorder (e.g., Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder, Separation Anxiety Disorder, Social Phobia, Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia, or Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder) (Criterion G).
The individual experiences a marked, persistent, and excessive or unreasonable fear
when in the presence of, or when anticipating an encounter with, a specific object or
situation. The focus of the fear may be anticipated harm from some aspect of the object
or situation (e.g., an individual may fear air travel because of a concern about crashing,
may fear dogs because of concerns about being bitten, or may fear driving because of
concerns about being hit by other vehicles on the road). Specific Phobias may also
involve concerns about losing control, panicking, and fainting that might occur on
exposure to the feared object. For example, individuals afraid of blood and injury may
also worry about the possibility of fainting; people afraid of heights may also worry
about dizziness; and people afraid of closed-in situations may also worry about losing
control and screaming.
Anxiety is almost invariably felt immediately on confronting the phobic stimulus
(e.g., a person with a Specific Phobia of cats will almost invariably have an immediate406
Anxiety Disorders
anxiety response when forced to confront a cat). The level of anxiety or fear usually
varies as a function of both the degree of proximity to the phobic stimulus (e.g., fear
intensifies as the cat approaches and decreases as the cat withdraws) and the degree to
which escape from the phobic stimulus is limited (e.g., fear intensifies as the elevator
approaches the midway point between floors and decreases as the doors open at the
next floor). However, the intensity of the fear may not always relate predictably to the
phobic stimulus (e.g., a person afraid of heights may experience variable amounts of
fear when crossing the same bridge on different occasions). Sometimes full-blown Panic
Attacks are experienced in response to the phobic stimulus, especially when the person
must remain in the situation or believes that escape will be impossible. Because marked
anticipatory anxiety occurs if the person is confronted with the necessity of entering into
the phobic situation, such situations are usually avoided. Less commonly, the person
forces himself or herself to endure the phobic situation, but it is experienced with intense
anxiety.
Adults with this disorder recognize that the phobia is excessive or unreasonable.
The diagnosis would be Delusional Disorder instead of Specific Phobia for an individual
who avoids an elevator because of a conviction that it has been sabotaged and who
does not recognize that this fear is excessive and unreasonable. Moreover, the diagnosis
should not be given if the fear is reasonable given the context of the stimuli (e.g., fear
of being shot in a hunting area or a dangerous neighborhood). Insight into the excessive
or unreasonable nature of the fear tends to increase with age and is not required to
make the diagnosis in children.
Fears of circumscribed objects or situations are very common, especially in children,
but in many cases the degree of impairment is insufficient to warrant a diagnosis. If
the phobia does not significantly interfere with the individual's functioning or cause
marked distress, the diagnosis is not made. For example, a person who is afraid of
snakes to the point of expressing intense fear in the presence of snakes would not
receive a diagnosis of Specific Phobia if he or she lives in an area devoid of snakes, is
not restricted in activities by the fear of snakes, and is not distressed about having a
fear of snakes.
Subtypes
The following subtypes may be specified to indicate the focus of fear or avoidance in
Specific Phobia (e.g., Specific Phobia, Animal Type).
Animal Type. This subtype should be specified if the fear is cued by animals
or insects. This subtype generally has a childhood onset.
Natural Environment Type. This subtype should be specified if the fear is
cued by objects in the natural environment, such as storms, heights, or water.
This subtype generally has a childhood onset.
Blood-Injection-Injury Type. This subtype should be specified if the fear is
cued by seeing blood or an injury or by receiving an injection or other invasive
medical procedure. This subtype is highly familial and is often characterized by
a strong vasovagal response.
Situational Type. This subtype should be specified if the fear is cued by a
specific situation such as public transportation, tunnels, bridges, elevators, flying,
driving, or enclosed places. This subtype has a bimodal age-at-onset distribution,
with one peak in childhood and another peak in the mid-20s. This subtype300.29 Specific Phobia
407
appears to be similar to Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia in its characteristic sex
ratios, familial aggregation pattern, and age at onset.
Other Type. This subtype should be specified if the fear is cued by other stimuli.
These stimuli might include the fear or avoidance of situations that might lead to
choking, vomiting, or contracting an illness; "space" phobia (i.e., the individual
is afraid of falling down if away from walls or other means of physical support);
and children's fears of loud sounds or costumed characters.
The frequency of the subtypes in adult clinical settings, from most to least frequent,
is Situational; Natural Environment; Blood-Injection-Injury; and Animal. In many cases,
more than one subtype of Specific Phobia is present. Having one phobia of a specific
subtype tends to increase the likelihood of having another phobia from within the same
subtype (e.g., fear of cats and snakes). When more than one subtype applies, they
should all be noted (e.g., Specific Phobia, Animal and Natural Environment Types).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Specific Phobia may re-
sult in a restricted lifestyle or interference with certain occupations, depending on the
type of phobia. For example, job promotion may be threatened by avoidance of air
travel, and social activities may be restricted by fears of crowded or closed-in places.
Specific Phobias frequently co-occur with other Anxiety Disorders but are rarely the
focus of clinical attention in these situations. The Specific Phobia is usually associated
with less distress or less interference with functioning than the comorbid main diagnosis.
There is a particularly frequent co-occurrence between Specific Phobias and Panic
Disorder With Agoraphobia.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions. A
vasovagal fainting response is characteristic of Blood-Injection-Injury Type Specific
Phobias; approximately 75% of such individuals report a history of fainting in these
situations. The physiological response is characterized by an initial brief acceleration of
heart rate followed by a deceleration of heart rate and a drop in blood pressure, which
contrasts with the usual acceleration of heart rate in other Specific Phobias. Certain
general medical conditions may be exacerbated as a consequence of phobic avoidance.
For example, Specific Phobias, Blood-Injection-Injury Type, may have detrimental effects
on dental or physical health, because the individual may avoid obtaining necessary
medical care. Similarly, fears of choking may have a detrimental effect on health when
food is limited to substances that are easy to swallow or when oral medication is
avoided.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
The content of phobias as well as their prevalence varies with culture and ethnicity. For
example, fears of magic or spirits are present in many cultures and should be considered
a Specific Phobia only if the fear is excessive in the context of that culture and causes
significant impairment or distress.
In children, the anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, or clinging.
Children often do not recognize that the fears are excessive or unreasonable and rarely408
Anxiety Disorders
report distress about having the phobias. Fears of animals and other objects in the natural
environment are particularly common and are usually transitory in childhood. A
diagnosis of Specific Phobia is not warranted unless the fears lead to clinically significant
impairment (e.g., unwillingness to go to school for fear of encountering a dog on the
street).
The sex ratio varies across different types of Specific Phobias. Approximately
75%-90% of individuals with the Animal and Natural Environment Type are female
(except for fear of heights, where the percentage of females is 55%-70%). Similarly,
approximately 75%-90% of individuals with the Situational Type are female. Approxi-
mately 55%-70% of individuals with the Blood-Injection-Injury Type are female.
Prevalence
Although phobias are common in the general population, they rarely result in sufficient
impairment or distress to warrant a diagnosis of Specific Phobia. The reported prevalence
may vary depending on the threshold used to determine impairment or distress and the
number of types of phobias surveyed. In community samples, a 1-year prevalence rate
of about 9% has been reported, with lifetime rates ranging from 10% to 11.3%.
Course
The mean age at onset varies according to the type of Specific Phobia. Age at onset for
Specific Phobia, Situational Type, tends to be bimodally distributed, with a peak in
childhood and a second peak in the mid-20s. Specific Phobias, Natural Environment
Type (e.g., height phobia), tend to begin primarily in childhood, although many new
cases of height phobia develop in early adulthood. The ages at onset for Specific Phobias,
Animal Type, and for Specific Phobias, Blood-Injection-Injury Type, are also usually in
childhood.
Predisposing factors to the onset of Specific Phobias include traumatic events (such
as being attacked by an animal or trapped in a closet), unexpected Panic Attacks in the
to-be-feared situation, observation of others undergoing trauma or demonstrating
fearfulness (such as observing others fall from heights or become afraid in the presence
of certain animals), and informational transmission (e.g., repeated parental warnings
about the dangers of certain animals or media coverage of airplane crashes). Feared
objects or situations tend to involve things that may actually represent a threat or have
represented a threat at some point in the course of human evolution. Phobias that result
from traumatic events or unexpected Panic Attacks tend to be particularly acute in their
development. Phobias of traumatic origin do not have a characteristic age at onset (e.g.,
fear of choking, which usually follows a choking or near-choking incident, may develop
at almost any age). Phobias that persist into adulthood remit only infrequently (around
20% of cases).
Familial Pattern
Preliminary evidence suggests that there may be an aggregation within families by type
of phobia (e.g., first-degree biological relatives of persons with Specific Phobias, Animal
Type, are likely to have animal phobias, although not necessarily of the same animal,
and first-degree biological relatives of persons with Specific Phobias, Situational Type,300.29 Specific Phobia
409
are likely to have phobias of situations). Fears of blood and injury have particularly
strong familial patterns.
Differential
Diagnosis
Specific Phobias differ from most other Anxiety Disorders in levels of intercurrent anxiety.
Typically, individuals with Specific Phobia, unlike those with Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia, do not present with pervasive anxiety, because their fear is limited to
specific, circumscribed objects or situations. However, generalized anxious anticipation
may emerge under conditions in which encounters with the phobic stimulus become
more likely (e.g., when a person who is fearful of snakes moves to a desert area) or
when life events force immediate confrontation with the phobic stimulus (e.g., when a
person who is fearful of flying is forced by circumstances to fly).
Differentiation of Specific Phobia, Situational Type, from Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia may be particularly difficult because both disorders may include Panic
Attacks and avoidance of similar types of situations (e.g., driving, flying, public
transportation, and enclosed places). Prototypically, Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia
is characterized by the initial onset of unexpected Panic Attacks and the subsequent
avoidance of multiple situations thought to be likely triggers of the Panic Attacks.
Prototypically, Specific Phobia, Situational Type, is characterized by situational avoid-
ance in the absence of recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks. Some presentations fall
between these prototypes and require clinical judgment in the selection of the most
appropriate diagnosis. Four factors can be helpful in making this judgment: the focus
of fear, the type and number of Panic Attacks, the number of situations avoided, and
the level of intercurrent anxiety. For example, an individual who had not previously
feared or avoided elevators has a Panic Attack in an elevator and begins to dread going
to work because of the need to take the elevator to his office on the 24th floor. If this
individual subsequently has Panic Attacks only in elevators (even if the focus of fear is
on the Panic Attack), then a diagnosis of Specific Phobia may be appropriate. If, however,
the individual experiences unexpected Panic Attacks in other situations and begins to
avoid or endure with dread other situations because of fear of a Panic Attack, then a
diagnosis of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia would be warranted. Furthermore, the
presence of pervasive apprehension about having a Panic Attack even when not
anticipating exposure to a phobic situation also supports a diagnosis of Panic Disorder
With Agoraphobia. If the individual has additional unexpected Panic Attacks in other
situations but no additional avoidance or endurance with dread develops, then the
appropriate diagnosis would be Panic Disorder Without Agoraphobia.
Concurrent diagnoses of Specific Phobia and Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia are
sometimes warranted. In these cases, consideration of the focus of the individual's
concern about the phobic situation may be helpful. For example, avoidance of being
alone because of concern about having unexpected Panic Attacks warrants a diagnosis
of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia (if other criteria are met), whereas the additional
phobic avoidance of air travel, if due to worries about bad weather conditions and
crashing, may warrant an additional diagnosis of Specific Phobia.
Specific Phobia and Social Phobia can be differentiated on the basis of the focus
of the fears. For example, avoidance of eating in a restaurant may be based on concerns
about negative evaluation from others (i.e., Social Phobia) or concerns about choking
(i.e., Specific Phobia). In contrast to the avoidance in Specific Phobia, the avoidance in410
Anxiety Disorders
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder follows a life-threatening stressor and is accompanied
by additional features (e.g., reexperiencing the trauma and restricted affect). In Obses-
sive-Compulsive Disorder, the avoidance is associated with the content of the
obsession (e.g., dirt, contamination). In individuals with Separation Anxiety Disorder,
a diagnosis of Specific Phobia is not given if the avoidance behavior is exclusively limited
to fears of separation from persons to whom the individual is attached. Moreover,
children with Separation Anxiety Disorder often have associated exaggerated fears of
people or events (e.g., of muggers, burglars, kidnappers, car accidents, airplane travel)
that might threaten the integrity of the family. A separate diagnosis of Specific Phobia
would rarely be warranted.
The differentiation between Hypochondriasis and a Specific Phobia, Other Type
(i.e., avoidance of situations that may lead to contracting an illness), depends on the
presence or absence of disease conviction. Individuals with Hypochondriasis are
preoccupied with fears of having a disease, whereas individuals with a Specific Phobia
fear contracting a disease (but do not believe it is already present). In individuals with
Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa, a diagnosis of Specific Phobia is not given
if the avoidance behavior is exclusively limited to avoidance of food and food-related
cues. An individual with Schizophrenia or another Psychotic Disorder may avoid
certain activities in response to delusions, but does not recognize that the fear is excessive
or unreasonable.
Fears are very common, particularly in childhood, but they do not warrant a
diagnosis of Specific Phobia unless there is significant interference with social, educa-
tional, or occupational functioning or marked distress about having the phobia.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.29 Specific Phobia
A. Marked and persistent fear that is excessive or unreasonable, cued by
the presence or anticipation of a specific object or situation (e.g., flying,
heights, animals, receiving an injection, seeing blood).
B. Exposure to the phobic stimulus almost invariably provokes an immedi-
ate anxiety response, which may take the form of a situationally bound
or situationally predisposed Panic Attack. Note: In children, the anxiety
may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, or clinging.
C. The person recognizes that the fear is excessive or unreasonable.
Note: In children, this feature may be absent.
D. The phobic situation(s) is avoided or else is endured with intense anxiety
or distress.
E. The avoidance, anxious anticipation, or distress in the feared situation(s)
interferes significantly with the person's normal routine, occupational
(or academic) functioning, or social activities or relationships, or there
is marked distress about having the phobia.
(continued)300.23 Social Phobia
411
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.29 Specific Phobia (continued)
F. In individuals under age 18 years, the duration is at least 6 months.
G. The anxiety, Panic Attacks, or phobic avoidance associated with the
specific object or situation are not better accounted for by another
mental disorder, such as Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (e.g., fear of
dirt in someone with an obsession about contamination), Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder (e.g., avoidance of stimuli associated with a severe
stressor), Separation Anxiety Disorder (e.g., avoidance of school), Social
Phobia (e.g., avoidance of social situations because of fear of embar-
rassment), Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia, or Agoraphobia Without
History of Panic Disorder.
Specify type:
Animal Type
Natural Environment Type (e.g., heights, storms, water)
Blood-Injection-Injury Type
SituationalType (e.g., airplanes, elevators, enclosed places)
Other Type (e.g., phobic avoidance of situations that may lead to choking,
vomiting, or contracting an illness; in children, avoidance of loud sounds
or costumed characters)
300.23 Social Phobia
(Social Anxiety Disorder)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Social Phobia is a marked and persistent fear of social or
performance situations in which embarrassment may occur (Criterion A). Exposure to
the social or performance situation almost invariably provokes an immediate anxiety
response (Criterion B). This response may take the form of a situationally bound or
situationally predisposed Panic Attack (see p. 394). Although adolescents and adults
with this disorder recognize that their fear is excessive or unreasonable (Criterion C),
this may not be the case with children. Most often, the social or performance situation
is avoided, although it is sometimes endured with dread (Criterion D). The diagnosis is
appropriate only if the avoidance, fear, or anxious anticipation of encountering the social
or performance situation interferes significantly with the person's daily routine, occupa-
tional functioning, or social life, or if the person is markedly distressed about having the
phobia (Criterion E). In individuals younger than age 18 years, symptoms must have
persisted for at least 6 months before Social Phobia is diagnosed (Criterion F). The fear
or avoidance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general
medical condition and is not better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., Panic
Disorder, Separation Anxiety Disorder, Body Dysmorphic Disorder, a Pervasive Devel-
opmental Disorder, or Schizoid Personality Disorder) (Criterion G). If another mental412
Anxiety Disorders
disorder or general medical condition is present (e.g., Stuttering, Parkinson's disease,
Anorexia Nervosa), the fear or avoidance is not limited to concern about its social impact
(Criterion H).
In feared social or performance situations, individuals with Social Phobia experience
concerns about embarrassment and are afraid that others will judge them to be anxious,
weak, "crazy," or stupid. They may fear public speaking because of concern that others
will notice their trembling hands or voice or they may experience extreme anxiety when
conversing with others because of fear that they will appear inarticulate. They may avoid
eating, drinking, or writing in public because of a fear of being embarrassed by having
others see their hands shake. Individuals with Social Phobia almost always experience
symptoms of anxiety (e.g., palpitations, tremors, sweating, gastrointestinal discomfort,
diarrhea, muscle tension, blushing, confusion) in the feared social situations, and, in
severe cases, these symptoms may meet the criteria for a Panic Attack (see p. 395).
Blushing may be more typical of Social Phobia.
Adults with Social Phobia recognize that the fear is excessive or unreasonable,
although this is not always the case in children. For example, the diagnosis would be
Delusional Disorder instead of Social Phobia for an individual who avoids eating in
public because of a conviction that he or she will be observed by the police and who
does not recognize that this fear is excessive and unreasonable. Moreover, the diagnosis
should not be given if the fear is reasonable given the context of the stimuli (e.g., fear
of being called on in class when unprepared).
The person with Social Phobia typically will avoid the feared situations. Less
commonly, the person forces himself or herself to endure the social or performance
situation, but experiences it with intense anxiety. Marked anticipatory anxiety may also
occur far in advance of upcoming social or public situations (e.g., worrying every day
for several weeks before attending a social event). There may be a vicious cycle of
anticipatory anxiety leading to fearful cognition and anxiety symptoms in the feared
situations, which leads to actual or perceived poor performance in the feared situations,
which leads to embarrassment and increased anticipatory anxiety about the feared
situations, and so on.
The fear or avoidance must interfere significantly with the person's normal routine,
occupational or academic functioning, or social activities or relationships, or the person
must experience marked distress about having the phobia. For example, a person who
is afraid of speaking in public would not receive a diagnosis of Social Phobia if this
activity is not routinely encountered in job or classroom and the person is not particularly
distressed about it. Fears of being embarrassed in social situations are common, but
usually the degree of distress or impairment is insufficient to warrant a diagnosis of
Social Phobia. Transient social anxiety or avoidance is especially common in childhood
and adolescence (e.g., an adolescent girl may avoid eating in front of boys for a short
time, then resume usual behavior). In those younger than age 18 years, only symptoms
that persist for at least 6 months qualify for the diagnosis of Social Phobia.
Specifier
Generalized. This specifier can be used when the fears are related to most
social situations (e.g., initiating or maintaining conversations, participating in
small groups, dating, speaking to authority figures, attending parties). Individuals
with Social Phobia, Generalized, usually fear both public performance situations300.23 Social Phobia
413
and social interactional situations. Because individuals with Social Phobia often
do not spontaneously report the full range of their social fears, it is useful for the
clinician to review a list of social and performance situations with the individual.
Individuals whose clinical manifestations do not meet the definition of General-
ized compose a heterogeneous group that includes persons who fear a single
performance situation as well as those who fear several, but not most, social
situations. Individuals with Social Phobia, Generalized, may be more likely to
manifest deficits in social skills and to have severe social and work impairment.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Common associated fea-
tures of Social Phobia include hypersensitivity to criticism, negative evaluation, or
rejection; difficulty being assertive; and low self-esteem or feelings of inferiority.
Individuals with Social Phobia also often fear indirect evaluation by others, such as
taking a test. They may manifest poor social skills (e.g., poor eye contact) or observable
signs of anxiety (e.g., cold clammy hands, tremors, shaky voice). Individuals with Social
Phobia often underachieve in school due to test anxiety or avoidance of classroom
participation. They may underachieve at work because of anxiety during, or avoidance
of, speaking in groups, in public, or to authority figures and colleagues. Persons with
Social Phobia often have decreased social support networks and are less likely to marry.
In more severe cases, individuals may drop out of school, be unemployed and not seek
work due to difficulty interviewing for jobs, have no friends or cling to unfulfilling
relationships, completely refrain from dating, or remain with their family of origin.
Social Phobia may be associated with Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia, Agorapho-
bia Without History of Panic Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Mood Disorders,
Substance-Related Disorders, and Somatization Disorder and usually precedes these
disorders. In clinical samples, Avoidant Personality Disorder is frequently present in
individuals with Social Phobia, Generalized.
Associated laboratory findings. Compared with those with Panic Disorder, individ-
uals with Social Phobia are less likely to develop a Panic Attack in response to sodium
lactate infusion or carbon dioxide inhalation. This finding supports the differentiation
of Social Phobia from Panic Disorder, although none of these findings are considered
to be diagnostic of these disorders.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Clinical presentation and resulting impairment may differ across cultures, depending on
social demands. In certain cultures (e.g., Japan and Korea), individuals with Social Phobia
may develop persistent and excessive fears of giving offense to others in social situations,
instead of being embarrassed. These fears may take the form of extreme anxiety that
blushing, eye-to-eye contact, or one's body odor will be offensive to others (taijin
kyofusho in Japan).
In children, crying, tantrums, freezing, clinging or staying close to a familiar person,
and inhibited interactions to the point of mutism may be present. Young children may
appear excessively timid in unfamiliar social settings, shrink from contact with others,
refuse to participate in group play, typically stay on the periphery of social activities,4l4
Anxiety Disorders
and attempt to remain close to familiar adults. Unlike adults, children with Social Phobia
usually do not have the option of avoiding feared situations altogether and may be
unable to identify the nature of their anxiety. There may be a decline in classroom
performance, school refusal, or avoidance of age-appropriate social activities and dating.
To make the diagnosis in children, there must be evidence of capacity for social
relationships with familiar people and the social anxiety must occur in peer settings, not
just in interactions with adults. Because of the disorder's early onset and chronic course,
impairment in children tends to take the form of failure to achieve an expected level of
functioning, rather than a decline from an optimal level of functioning. In contrast, when
the onset is in adolescence, the disorder may lead to decrements in social and academic
performance.
Epidemiological and community-based studies suggest that Social Phobia is more
common in women than in men. In most clinical samples, however, the sexes are either
equally represented or the majority are male.
Prevalence
Epidemiological and community-based studies have reported a lifetime prevalence of
Social Phobia ranging from 3% to 13%. The reported prevalence may vary depending
on the threshold used to determine distress or impairment and the number of types of
social situations specifically surveyed. In one study, 20% reported excessive fear of public
speaking and performance, but only about 2% appeared to experience enough
impairment or distress to warrant a diagnosis of Social Phobia. In the general population,
most individuals with Social Phobia fear public speaking, whereas somewhat less than
half fear speaking to strangers or meeting new people. Other performance fears (e.g.,
eating, drinking, or writing in public, or using a public restroom) appear to be less
common. In clinical settings, the vast majority of persons with Social Phobia fear more
than one type of social situation. Social Phobia is rarely the reason for admission to
inpatient settings. In outpatient clinics, rates of Social Phobia have ranged between 10%
and 20% of individuals with Anxiety Disorders, but rates vary widely by site.
Course
Social Phobia typically has an onset in the mid-teens, sometimes emerging out of a
childhood history of social inhibition or shyness. Some individuals report an onset in
early childhood. Onset may abruptly follow a stressful or humiliating experience, or it
may be insidious. The course of Social Phobia is often continuous. Duration is frequently
lifelong, although the disorder may attenuate in severity or remit during adulthood.
Severity of impairment may fluctuate with life stressors and demands. For example,
Social Phobia may diminish after a person with fear of dating marries and reemerge after
death of a spouse. A job promotion to a position requiring public speaking may result
in the emergence of Social Phobia in someone who previously never needed to speak
in public.
Familial Pattern
Social Phobia appears to occur more frequently among first-degree biological relatives
of those with the disorder compared with the general population.300.23 Social Phobia
Differential
415
Diagnosis
Individuals with both Panic Attacks and social avoidance sometimes present a potentially
difficult diagnostic problem. Prototypically, Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia is
characterized by the initial onset of unexpected Panic Attacks and the subsequent
avoidance of multiple situations thought to be likely triggers of the Panic Attacks.
Although social situations may be avoided in Panic Disorder due to the fear of being
seen while having a Panic Attack, Panic Disorder is characterized by recurrent unex-
pected Panic Attacks that are not limited to social situations, and the diagnosis of Social
Phobia is not made when the only social fear is of being seen while having a Panic
Attack. Prototypically, Social Phobia is characterized by the avoidance of social situations
in the absence of recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks. When Panic Attacks do occur,
they take the form of situationally bound or situationally predisposed Panic Attacks (e.g.,
a person with fear of embarrassment when speaking in public experiences Panic Attacks
cued only by public speaking or other social situations). Some presentations fall between
these prototypes and require clinical judgment in the selection of the most appropriate
diagnosis. For example, an individual who had not previously had a fear of public
speaking has a Panic Attack while giving a talk and begins to dread giving presentations.
If this individual subsequently has Panic Attacks only in social performance situations
(even if the focus of fear is on the panic), then a diagnosis of Social Phobia may be
appropriate. If, however, the individual continues to experience unexpected Panic
Attacks, then a diagnosis of Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia would be warranted. If
criteria are met for both Social Phobia and Panic Disorder, both diagnoses may be given.
For example, an individual with lifelong fear and avoidance of most social situations
(Social Phobia) later develops Panic Attacks in nonsocial situations and a variety of
additional avoidance behaviors (Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia).
Avoidance of situations because of a fear of possible humiliation is highly prominent
in Social Phobia, but may also at times occur in Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia
and Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder. The situations avoided in
Social Phobia are limited to those involving possible scrutiny by other people. Fears in
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder typically involve characteristic clusters
of situations that may or may not involve scrutiny by others (e.g., being alone outside
the home or being home alone; being on a bridge or in an elevator; traveling in a bus,
train, automobile, or airplane). The role of a companion also may be useful in
distinguishing Social Phobia from Agoraphobia (With and Without Panic Disorder).
Typically, individuals with agoraphobic avoidance prefer to be with a trusted companion
when in the feared situation, whereas individuals with Social Phobia may have marked
anticipatory anxiety, but characteristically do not have Panic Attacks when alone. A
person with Social Phobia who fears crowded stores would feel scrutinized with or
without a companion and might be less anxious without the added burden of perceived
scrutiny by the companion.
Children with Separation Anxiety Disorder may avoid social settings due to
concerns about being separated from their caretaker, concerns about being embarrassed
by needing to leave prematurely to return home, or concerns about requiring the
presence of a parent when it is not developmentally appropriate. A separate diagnosis
of Social Phobia is generally not warranted. Children with Separation Anxiety Disorder
are usually comfortable in social settings in their own home, whereas those with Social
Phobia display signs of discomfort even when feared social situations occur at home.
Although fear of embarrassment or humiliation may be present in Generalized4l6
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety Disorder or Specific Phobia (e.g., embarrassment about fainting when having
blood drawn), this is not the main focus of the individual's fear or anxiety. Children with
Generalized Anxiety Disorder have excessive worries about the quality of their perfor-
mance, but these occur even when they are not evaluated by others, whereas in Social
Phobia the potential evaluation by others is the key to the anxiety.
In a Pervasive Developmental Disorder and Schizoid Personality Disorder,
social situations are avoided because of lack of interest in relating to other individuals.
In contrast, individuals with Social Phobia have a capacity for and interest in social
relationships with familiar people. In particular, for children to qualify for a diagnosis
of Social Phobia, they must have at least one age-appropriate social relationship with
someone outside the immediate family (e.g., a child who feels uncomfortable in social
gatherings with peers and avoids such situations, but who has an active interest in and
a relationship with one familiar same-age friend).
Avoidant Personality Disorder shares a number of features with Social Phobia
and appears to overlap extensively with Social Phobia, Generalized. For individuals with
Social Phobia, Generalized, the additional diagnosis of Avoidant Personality Disorder
should be considered.
Social anxiety and avoidance of social situations are associated features of many
other mental disorders (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic Disorder, Schizo-
phrenia, Body Dysmorphic Disorder). If the symptoms of social anxiety or avoidance
occur only during the course of another mental disorder and are judged to be better
accounted for by that disorder, the additional diagnosis of Social Phobia is not made.
Individuals with Social Phobia may be vulnerable to a worsening of social anxiety
and avoidance related to a general medical condition or mental disorder with potentially
embarrassing symptoms (e.g., tremor in Parkinson's disease, abnormal eating behavior
in Anorexia Nervosa, obesity, strabismus, or facial scarring). However, if social anxiety
and avoidance are limited to concerns about the general medical condition or mental
disorder, by convention the diagnosis of Social Phobia is not made. If the social
avoidance is clinically significant, a separate diagnosis of Anxiety Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified may be given.
Performance anxiety, stage fright, and shyness in social situations that involve
unfamiliar people are common and should not be diagnosed as Social Phobia unless
the anxiety or avoidance leads to clinically significant impairment or marked distress.
Children commonly exhibit social anxiety, particularly when interacting with unfamiliar
adults. A diagnosis of Social Phobia should not be made in children unless the social
anxiety is also evident in peer settings and persists for at least 6 months.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.23 Social Phobia
A. A marked and persistent fear of one or more social or performance
situations in which the person is exposed to unfamiliar people or to
possible scrutiny by others. The individual fears that he or she will act
in a way (or show anxiety symptoms) that will be humiliating or
embarrassing. Note: In children, there must be evidence of the capacity
for age-appropriate social relationships with familiar people and the
anxiety must occur in peer settings, not just in interactions with adults.
(continued)300.3 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
417
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.23 Social Phobia (continued)
B. Exposure to the feared social situation almost invariably provokes
anxiety, which may take the form of a situationally bound or situationally
predisposed Panic Attack. Note: In children, the anxiety may be
expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, or shrinking from social situa-
tions with unfamiliar people.
C. The person recognizes that the fear is excessive or unreasonable.
Note: In children, this feature may be absent.
D. The feared social or performance situations are avoided or else are
endured with intense anxiety or distress.
E. The avoidance, anxious anticipation, or distress in the feared social or
performance situation(s) interferes significantly with the person's normal
routine, occupational (academic) functioning, or social activities or
relationships, or there is marked distress about having the phobia.
F. In individuals under age 18 years, the duration is at least 6 months.
G. The fear or avoidance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition and is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., Panic Disorder With or Without Agoraphobia, Separation Anxiety
Disorder, Body Dysmorphic Disorder, a Pervasive Developmental Dis-
order, or Schizoid Personality Disorder).
H. If a general medical condition or another mental disorder is present, the
fear in Criterion A is unrelated to it, e.g., the fear is not of Stuttering,
trembling in Parkinson's disease, or exhibiting abnormal eating behavior
in Anorexia Nervosa or Bulimia Nervosa.
Specify if:
Generalized: if the fears include most social situations (also consider the
additional diagnosis of Avoidant Personality Disorder)
300.3 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder are recurrent obsessions or
compulsions (Criterion A) that are severe enough to be time consuming (i.e., they take
more than 1 hour a day) or cause marked distress or significant impairment (Criterion C).
At some point during the course of the disorder, the person has recognized that the
obsessions or compulsions are excessive or unreasonable (Criterion B). If another Axis I
disorder is present, the content of the obsessions or compulsions is not restricted to it418
Anxiety Disorders
(Criterion D). The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition (Criterion E).
Obsessions are persistent ideas, thoughts, impulses, or images that are experienced
as intrusive and inappropriate and that cause marked anxiety or distress. The intrusive
and inappropriate quality of the obsessions has been referred to as "ego-dystonic." This
refers to the individual's sense that the content of the obsession is alien, not within his
or her own control, and not the kind of thought that he or she would expect to have.
However, the individual is able to recognize that the obsessions are the product of his
or her own mind and are not imposed from without (as in thought insertion).
The most common obsessions are repeated thoughts about contamination (e.g.,
becoming contaminated by shaking hands), repeated doubts (e.g., wondering whether
one has performed some act such as having hurt someone in a traffic accident or having
left a door unlocked), a need to have things in a particular order (e.g., intense distress
when objects are disordered or asymmetrical), aggressive or horrific impulses (e.g., to
hurt one's child or to shout an obscenity in church), and sexual imagery (e.g., a recurrent
pornographic image). The thoughts, impulses, or images are not simply excessive worries
about real-life problems (e.g., concerns about current ongoing difficulties in life, such
as financial, work, or school problems) and are unlikely to be related to a real-life
problem.
The individual with obsessions usually attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts
or impulses or to neutralize them with some other thought or action (i.e., a compulsion).
For example, an individual plagued by doubts about having turned off the stove attempts
to neutralize them by repeatedly checking to ensure that it is off.
Compulsions are repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or
mental acts (e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) the goal of which is to
prevent or reduce anxiety or distress, not to provide pleasure or gratification. In most
cases, the person feels driven to perform the compulsion to reduce the distress that
accompanies an obsession or to prevent some dreaded event or situation. For example,
individuals with obsessions about being contaminated may reduce their mental distress
by washing their hands until their skin is raw; individuals distressed by obsessions about
having left a door unlocked may be driven to check the lock every few minutes;
individuals distressed by unwanted blasphemous thoughts may find relief in counting
to 10 backward and forward 100 times for each thought. In some cases, individuals
perform rigid or stereotyped acts according to idiosyncratically elaborated rules without
being able to indicate why they are doing them. By definition, compulsions are either
clearly excessive or are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to
neutralize or prevent. The most common compulsions involve washing and cleaning,
counting, checking, requesting or demanding assurances, repeating actions, and
ordering.
By definition, adults with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder have at some point
recognized that the obsessions or compulsions are excessive or unreasonable. This
requirement does not apply to children because they may lack sufficient cognitive
awareness to make this judgment. However, even in adults there is a broad range of
insight into the reasonableness of the obsessions or compulsions. Some individuals are
uncertain about the reasonableness of their obsessions or compulsions, and any given
individual's insight may vary across times and situations. For example, the person may
recognize a contamination compulsion as unreasonable when discussing it in a "safe
situation" (e.g., in the therapist's office), but not when forced to handle money. At those
times when the individual recognizes that the obsessions and compulsions are unrea-300.3 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
419
sonable, he or she may desire or attempt to resist them. When attempting to resist a
compulsion, the individual may have a sense of mounting anxiety or tension that is often
relieved by yielding to the compulsion. In the course of the disorder, after repeated
failure to resist the obsessions or compulsions, the individual may give in to them, no
longer experience a desire to resist them, and may incorporate the compulsions into his
or her daily routines.
The obsessions or compulsions must cause marked distress, be time consuming
(take more than 1 hour per day), or significantly interfere with the individual's normal
routine, occupational functioning, or usual social activities or relationships with others.
Obsessions or compulsions can displace useful and satisfying behavior and can be highly
disruptive to overall functioning. Because obsessive intrusions can be distracting, they
frequently result in inefficient performance of cognitive tasks that require concentration,
such as reading or computation. In addition, many individuals avoid objects or situations
that provoke obsessions or compulsions. Such avoidance can become extensive and
can severely restrict general functioning.
Specifier
With Poor Insight. This specifier can be applied when, for most of the time
during the current episode, the individual does not recognize that the obsessions
or compulsions are excessive or unreasonable.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Frequently there is avoid-
ance of situations that involve the content of the obsessions, such as dirt or contamina-
tion. For example, a person with obsessions about dirt may avoid public restrooms or
shaking hands with strangers. Hypochondriacal concerns are common, with repeated
visits to physicians to seek reassurance. Guilt, a pathological sense of responsibility, and
sleep disturbances may be present. There may be excessive use of alcohol or of sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications. Performing compulsions may become a major life
activity, leading to serious marital, occupational, or social disability. Pervasive avoidance
may leave an individual housebound.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder may be associated with Major Depressive Disorder,
other Anxiety Disorders (Specific Phobia, Social Phobia, Panic Disorder), Eating Disor-
ders, and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder. There is a high incidence of
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in individuals with Tourette's Disorder, with estimates
ranging from approximately 35% to 50%. The incidence of Tourette's Disorder in
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is lower, with estimates ranging between 5% and 7%.
Between 20% and 30% of individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder have reported
current or past tics.
Associated laboratory findings. No laboratory findings have been identified that
are diagnostic of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. However, a variety of laboratory
findings have been noted to be abnormal in groups of individuals with Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder relative to control subjects. There is some evidence that some
serotonin agonists given acutely cause increased symptoms in some individuals with the
disorder. Individuals with the disorder may exhibit increased autonomic activity when420
Anxiety Disorders
confronted in the laboratory with circumstances that trigger an obsession. Physiological
reactivity decreases after the performance of compulsions.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Dermatological problems caused by excessive washing with water or caustic cleaning
agents may be observed.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Culturally prescribed ritual behavior is not in itself indicative of Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder unless it exceeds cultural norms, occurs at times and places judged inappro-
priate by others of the same culture, and interferes with social role functioning. Important
life transitions and mourning may lead to an intensification of ritual behavior that may
appear to be an obsession to a clinician who is not familiar with the cultural context.
Presentations of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in children are generally similar to
those in adulthood. Washing, checking, and ordering rituals are particularly common in
children. Children generally do not request help, and the symptoms may not be
ego-dystonic. More often the problem is identified by parents, who bring the child in
for treatment. Gradual declines in schoolwork secondary to impaired ability to concen-
trate have been reported. Like adults, children are more prone to engage in rituals at
home than in front of peers, teachers, or strangers.
This disorder is equally common in males and females.
Prevalence
Although Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder was previously thought to be relatively rare
in the general population, recent community studies have estimated a lifetime prevalence
of 2.5% and 1-year prevalence of 1.5%-2.1%.
Course
Although Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder usually begins in adolescence or early adult-
hood, it may begin in childhood. Modal age at onset is earlier in males than in females:
between ages 6 and 15 years for males and between ages 20 and 29 years for females.
For the most part, onset is gradual, but acute onset has been noted in some cases. The
majority of individuals have a chronic waxing and waning course, with exacerbation of
symptoms that may be related to stress. About 15% show progressive deterioration in
occupational and social functioning. About 5% have an episodic course with minimal
or no symptoms between episodes.
Familial Pattern
The concordance rate for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is higher for monozygotic
twins than it is for dizygotic twins. The rate of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in
first-degree biological relatives of individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and
in first-degree biological relatives of individuals with Tourette's Disorder is higher than
that in the general population.300.3 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Differential
421
Diagnosis
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder must be distinguished from Anxiety Disorder Due to
a General Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Anxiety Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition when the obsessions or compulsions are judged to be a direct
physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (see p. 436. This
determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination. A
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder is distinguished from Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder by the fact that a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or exposure
to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the obsessions or compulsions (see
p. 439).
Recurrent or intrusive thoughts, impulses, images, or behaviors may occur in the
context of many other mental disorders. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is not diag-
nosed if the content of the thoughts or the activities is exclusively related to another
mental disorder (e.g., preoccupation with appearance in Body Dysmorphic Disorder,
preoccupation with a feared object or situation in Specific or Social Phobia, hair pulling
in Trichotillomania). An additional diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder may
still be warranted if there are obsessions or compulsions whose content is unrelated to
the other mental disorder.
In a Major Depressive Episode, persistent brooding about potentially unpleasant
circumstances or about possible alternative actions is common and is considered a
mood-congruent aspect of depression rather than an obsession. For example, a
depressed individual who ruminates that he is worthless would not be considered to
have obsessions because such brooding is not ego-dystonic.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder is characterized by excessive worry, but such
worries are distinguished from obsessions by the fact that the person experiences them
as excessive concerns about real-life circumstances. For example, an excessive concern
that one may lose one's job would constitute a worry, not an obsession. In contrast, the
content of obsessions does not typically involve real-life problems, and the obsessions
are experienced as inappropriate by the individual (e.g., the intrusive distressing idea
that "God" is "dog" spelled backward).
If recurrent distressing thoughts are exclusively related to fears of having, or the
idea that one has, a serious disease based on misinterpretation of bodily symptoms, then
Hypochondriasis should be diagnosed instead of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.
However, if the concern about having an illness is accompanied by rituals such as
excessive washing or checking behavior related to concerns about the illness or about
spreading it to other people, then an additional diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder may be indicated. If the major concern is about contracting an illness (rather
than having an illness) and no rituals are involved, then a Specific Phobia of illness
may be the more appropriate diagnosis.
The ability of individuals to recognize that the obsessions or compulsions are
excessive or unreasonable occurs on a continuum. In some individuals with Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder, reality testing may be lost, and the obsession may reach delusional
proportions (e.g., the belief that one has caused the death of another person by having
willed it). In such cases, the presence of psychotic features may be indicated by an
additional diagnosis of Delusional Disorder or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified. The specifier With Poor Insight may be useful in those situations that are on
the boundary between obsession and delusion (e.g., an individual whose extreme
preoccupation with contamination, although exaggerated, is less intense than in a422
Anxiety Disorders
Delusional Disorder and is justified by the fact that germs are indeed ubiquitous).
The ruminative delusional thoughts and bizarre stereotyped behaviors that occur in
Schizophrenia are distinguished from obsessions and compulsions by the fact that they
are not ego-dystonic and not subject to reality testing. However, some individuals
manifest symptoms of both Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Schizophrenia and
warrant both diagnoses.
Tics (in Tic Disorder) and stereotyped movements (in Stereotypic Movement
Disorder) must be distinguished from compulsions. A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent,
nonrhythmic stereotyped motor movement or vocalization (e.g., eye blinking, tongue
protrusion, throat clearing). A stereotyped movement is a repetitive, seemingly driven
nonfunctional motor behavior (e.g., head banging, body rocking, self-biting). In contrast
to a compulsion, tics and stereotyped movements are typically less complex and are not
aimed at neutralizing an obsession. Some individuals manifest symptoms of both
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and a Tic Disorder (especially Tourette's Disorder), and
both diagnoses may be warranted.
Some activities, such as eating (e.g., Eating Disorders), sexual behavior (e.g.,
Paraphilias), gambling (e.g., Pathological Gambling), or substance use (e.g., Alcohol
Dependence or Abuse), when engaged in excessively, have been referred to as
"compulsive." However, these activities are not considered to be compulsions as defined
in this manual because the person usually derives pleasure from the activity and may
wish to resist it only because of its deleterious consequences.
Although Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder and Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder have similar names, the clinical manifestations of these disorders
are quite different. Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder is not characterized by
the presence of obsessions or compulsions and instead involves a pervasive pattern of
preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and control and must begin by early
adulthood. If an individual manifests symptoms of both Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder, both diagnoses can be given.
Superstitions and repetitive checking behaviors are commonly encountered in
everyday life. A diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder should be considered only
if they are particularly time consuming or result in clinically significant impairment or
distress.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.3 Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder
A. Either obsessions or compulsions:
Obsessions as defined by (1), (2), (3), and (4):
(1) recurrent and persistent thoughts, impulses, or images that are
experienced, at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and
inappropriate and that cause marked anxiety or distress
(2) the thoughts, impulses, or images are not simply excessive worries
about real-life problems
(continued)300.3 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
423
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.3 Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder (continued)
(3) the person attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, impulses,
or images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action
(4) the person recognizes that the obsessional thoughts, impulses, or
images are a product of his or her own mind (not imposed from
without as in thought insertion)
Compulsions as defined by (1) and (2):
(1) repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or
mental acts (e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) that
the person feels driven to perform in response to an obsession, or
according to rules that must be applied rigidly
(2) the behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing
distress or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however,
these behaviors or mental acts either are not connected in a realistic
way with what they are designed to neutralize or prevent or are
clearly excessive
B. At some point during the course of the disorder, the person has
recognized that the obsessions or compulsions are excessive or unrea-
sonable. Note: This does not apply to children.
C. The obsessions or compulsions cause marked distress, are time consum-
ing (take more than 1 hour a day), or significantly interfere with the
person's normal routine, occupational (or academic) functioning, or
usual social activities or relationships.
D. If another Axis I disorder is present, the content of the obsessions or
compulsions is not restricted to it (e.g., preoccupation 'with food in the
presence of an Eating Disorder; hair pulling in the presence of
Trichotillomania; concern with appearance in the presence of Body
Dysmorphic Disorder; preoccupation with drugs in the presence of a
Substance Use Disorder; preoccupation with having a serious illness in
the presence of Hypochondriasis; preoccupation with sexual urges or
fantasies in the presence of a Paraphilia; or guilty ruminations in the
presence of Major Depressive Disorder).
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
Specify if:
With Poor Insight: if, for most of the time during the current episode,
the person does not recognize that the obsessions and compulsions are
excessive or unreasonable424
Anxiety Disorders
309.81 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder is the development of characteristic
symptoms following exposure to an extreme traumatic stressor involving direct personal
experience of an event that involves actual or threatened death or serious injury, or other
threat to one's physical integrity; or witnessing an event that involves death, injury, or
a threat to the physical integrity of another person; or learning about unexpected or
violent death, serious harm, or threat of death or injury experienced by a family member
or other close associate (Criterion Al). The person's response to the event must involve
intense fear, helplessness, or horror (or in children, the response must involve disorga-
nized or agitated behavior) (Criterion A2). The characteristic symptoms resulting from
the exposure to the extreme trauma include persistent reexperiencing of the traumatic
event (Criterion B), persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma and
numbing of general responsiveness (Criterion C), and persistent symptoms of increased
arousal (Criterion D). The full symptom picture must be present for more than 1 month
(Criterion E), and the disturbance must cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion F).
Traumatic events that are experienced directly include, but are not limited to, military
combat, violent personal assault (sexual assault, physical attack, robbery, mugging),
being kidnapped, being taken hostage, terrorist attack, torture, incarceration as a prisoner
of war or in a concentration camp, natural or manmade disasters, severe automobile
accidents, or being diagnosed with a life-threatening illness. For children, sexually
traumatic events may include developmentally inappropriate sexual experiences without
threatened or actual violence or injury. Witnessed events include, but are not limited to,
observing the serious injury or unnatural death of another person due to violent assault,
accident, war, or disaster or unexpectedly witnessing a dead body or body parts. Events
experienced by others that are learned about include, but are not limited to, violent
personal assault, serious accident, or serious injury experienced by a family member or
a close friend; learning about the sudden, unexpected death of a family member or a
close friend; or learning that one's child has a life-threatening disease. The disorder may
be especially severe or long lasting when the stressor is of human design (e.g., torture,
rape). The likelihood of developing this disorder may increase as the intensity of and
physical proximity to the stressor increase.
The traumatic event can be reexperienced in various ways. Commonly the person
has recurrent and intrusive recollections of the event (Criterion Bl) or recurrent
distressing dreams during which the event is replayed (Criterion B2). In rare instances,
the person experiences dissociative states that last from a few seconds to several hours,
or even days, during which components of the event are relived and the person behaves
as though experiencing the event at that moment (Criterion B3). Intense psychological
distress (Criterion B4) or physiological reactivity (Criterion B5) often occurs when the
person is exposed to triggering events that resemble or symbolize an aspect of the
traumatic event (e.g., anniversaries of the traumatic event; cold, snowy weather or
uniformed guards for survivors of death camps in cold climates; hot, humid weather for
combat veterans of the South Pacific; entering any elevator for a woman who was raped
in an elevator).
Stimuli associated with the trauma are persistently avoided. The person commonly
makes deliberate efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or conversations about the traumatic309.81 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
425
event (Criterion Cl) and to avoid activities, situations, or people who arouse recollections
of it (Criterion C2). This avoidance of reminders may include amnesia for an important
aspect of the traumatic event (Criterion C3). Diminished responsiveness to the external
world, referred to as "psychic numbing" or "emotional anesthesia," usually begins soon
after the traumatic event. The individual may complain of having markedly diminished
interest or participation in previously enjoyed activities (Criterion C4), of feeling detached
or estranged from other people (Criterion C5), or of having markedly reduced ability to
feel emotions (especially those associated with intimacy, tenderness, and sexuality)
(Criterion C6). The individual may have a sense of a foreshortened future (e.g., not
expecting to have a career, marriage, children, or a normal life span) (Criterion C7).
The individual has persistent symptoms of anxiety or increased arousal that were
not present before the trauma. These symptoms may include difficulty falling or staying
asleep that may be due to recurrent nightmares during which the traumatic event is
relived (Criterion Dl), hypervigilance (Criterion D4), and exaggerated startle response
(Criterion D5). Some individuals report irritability or outbursts of anger (Criterion D2)
or difficulty concentrating or completing tasks (Criterion D3).
Specifiers
The following specifiers may be used to specify onset and duration of the symptoms of
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder:
Acute. This specifier should be used when the duration of symptoms is less
than 3 months.
Chronic. This specifier should be used when the symptoms last 3 months or
longer.
With Delayed Onset. This specifier indicates that at least 6 months have passed
between the traumatic event and the onset of the symptoms.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with Posttrau-
matic Stress Disorder may describe painful guilt feelings about surviving when others
did not survive or about the things they had to do to survive. Phobic avoidance of
situations or activities that resemble or symbolize the original trauma may interfere with
interpersonal relationships and lead to marital conflict, divorce, or loss of job. The
following associated constellation of symptoms may occur and are more commonly seen
in association with an interpersonal stressor (e.g., childhood sexual or physical abuse,
domestic battering, being taken hostage, incarceration as a prisoner of war or in a
concentration camp, torture): impaired affect modulation; self-destructive and impulsive
behavior; dissociative symptoms; somatic complaints; feelings of ineffectiveness, shame,
despair, or hopelessness; feeling permanently damaged; a loss of previously sustained
beliefs; hostility; social withdrawal; feeling constantly threatened; impaired relationships
with others; or a change from the individual's previous personality characteristics.
There may be increased risk of Panic Disorder, Agoraphobia, Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder, Social Phobia, Specific Phobia, Major Depressive Disorder, Somatization
Disorder, and Substance-Related Disorders. It is not known to what extent these disorders
precede or follow the onset of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.426
Anxiety Disorders
Associated laboratory findings. Increased arousal may be measured through stud-
ies of autonomic functioning (e.g., heart rate, electromyography, sweat gland activity).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
General medical conditions may occur as a consequence of the trauma (e.g., head injury,
burns).
Specific Culture and Age Features
Individuals who have recently emigrated from areas of considerable social unrest and
civil conflict may have elevated rates of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Such individuals
may be especially reluctant to divulge experiences of torture and trauma due to their
vulnerable political immigrant status. Specific assessments of traumatic experiences and
concomitant symptoms are needed for such individuals.
In younger children, distressing dreams of the event may, within several weeks,
change into generalized nightmares of monsters, of rescuing others, or of threats to self
or others. Young children usually do not have the sense that they are reliving the past;
rather, the reliving of the trauma may occur through repetitive play (e.g., a child who
was involved in a serious automobile accident repeatedly reenacts car crashes with toy
cars). Because it may be difficult for children to report diminished interest in significant
activities and constriction of affect, these symptoms should be carefully evaluated with
reports from parents, teachers, and other observers. In children, the sense of a
foreshortened future may be evidenced by the belief that life will be too short to include
becoming an adult. There may also be "omen formation"—that is, belief in an ability to
foresee future untoward events. Children may also exhibit various physical symptoms,
such as stomachaches and headaches.
Prevalence
Community-based studies reveal a lifetime prevalence for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
ranging from 1% to 14%, with the variability related to methods of ascertainment and
the population sampled. Studies of at-risk individuals (e.g., combat veterans, victims of
volcanic eruptions or criminal violence) have yielded prevalence rates ranging from 3%
to 58%.
Course
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder can occur at any age, including childhood. Symptoms
usually begin within the first 3 months after the trauma, although there may be a delay
of months, or even years, before symptoms appear. Frequently, the disturbance initially
meets criteria for Acute Stress Disorder (see p. 429) in the immediate aftermath of the
trauma. The symptoms of the disorder and the relative predominance of reexperiencing,
avoidance, and hyperarousal symptoms may vary over time. Duration of the symptoms
varies, with complete recovery occurring within 3 months in approximately half of cases,
with many others having persisting symptoms for longer than 12 months after the trauma.
The severity, duration, and proximity of an individual's exposure to the traumatic
event are the most important factors affecting the likelihood of developing this disorder.
There is some evidence that social supports, family history, childhood experiences,309.81 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
427
personality variables, and preexisting mental disorders may influence the development
of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. This disorder can develop in individuals without any
predisposing conditions, particularly if the stressor is especially extreme.
Differential Diagnosis
In Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, the stressor must be of an extreme (i.e., life-threatening)
nature. In contrast, in Adjustment Disorder, the stressor can be of any severity. The
diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder is appropriate both for situations in which the response
to an extreme stressor does not meet the criteria for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (or
another specific mental disorder) and for situations in which the symptom pattern of
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder occurs in response to a stressor that is not extreme (e.g.,
spouse leaving, being fired).
Not all psychopathology that occurs in individuals exposed to an extreme stressor
should necessarily be attributed to Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Symptoms of avoid-
ance, numbing, and increased arousal that are present before exposure to the
stressor do not meet criteria for the diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and
require consideration of other diagnoses (e.g., a Mood Disorder or another Anxiety
Disorder). Moreover, if the symptom response pattern to the extreme stressor meets
criteria for another mental disorder (e.g., Brief Psychotic Disorder, Conversion
Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder), these diagnoses should be given instead of, or in
addition to, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
Acute Stress Disorder is distinguished from Posttraumatic Stress Disorder because
the symptom pattern in Acute Stress Disorder must occur within 4 weeks of the traumatic
event and resolve within that 4-week period. If the symptoms persist for more than
1 month and meet criteria for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, the diagnosis is changed
from Acute Stress Disorder to Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
In Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, there are recurrent intrusive thoughts, but
these are experienced as inappropriate and are not related to an experienced traumatic
event. Flashbacks in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder must be distinguished from illusions,
hallucinations, and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in Schizophrenia,
other Psychotic Disorders, Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features, a delirium,
Substance-Induced Disorders, and Psychotic Disorders Due to a General Medical
Condition.
Malingering should be ruled out in those situations in which financial remunera-
tion, benefit eligibility, and forensic determinations play a role.
Diagnostic criteria for 309.81 Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder
A. The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which both of the
following were present:
(1) the person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an
event or events that involved actual or threatened death or serious
injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of self or others
(continued)428
Anxiety Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 309.81 Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (continued)
(2) the person's response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror.
Note: In children, this may be expressed instead by disorganized
or agitated behavior
B. The traumatic event is persistently reexperienced in one (or more) of
the following ways:
(1) recurrent and intrusive distressing recollections of the event, in-
cluding images, thoughts, or perceptions. Note: In young chil-
dren, repetitive play may occur in which themes or aspects of the
trauma are expressed.
(2) recurrent distressing dreams of the event. Note: In children, there
may be frightening dreams without recognizable content.
(3) acting or feeling as if the traumatic event were recurring (includes
a sense of reliving the experience, illusions, hallucinations, and
dissociative flashback episodes, including those that occur on
awakening or when intoxicated). Note: In young children,
trauma-specific reenactment may occur.
(4) intense psychological distress at exposure to internal or external
cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event
(5) physiological reactivity on exposure to internal or external cues
that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma and numbing
of general responsiveness (not present before the trauma), as indicated
by three (or more) of the following:
(1) efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or conversations associated with
the trauma
(2) efforts to avoid activities, places, or people that arouse recollections
of the trauma
(3) inability to recall an important aspect of the trauma
(4) markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities
(5) feeling of detachment or estrangement from others
(6) restricted range of affect (e.g., unable to have loving feelings)
(7) sense of a foreshortened future (e.g., does not expect to have a
career, marriage, children, or a normal life span)
D. Persistent symptoms of increased arousal (not present before the
trauma), as indicated by two (or more) of the following:
(1) difficulty falling or staying asleep
(2) irritability or outbursts of anger
(3) difficulty concentrating
(4) hypervigilance
(5) exaggerated startle response
(continued)308.3 Acute Stress Disorder
429
D Diagnostic criteria for 309.81 Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (continued)
E. Duration of the disturbance (symptoms in Criteria B, C, and D) is more
than 1 month.
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
Acute: if duration of symptoms is less than 3 months
Chronic: if duration of symptoms is 3 months or more
Specify if:
With Delayed Onset: if onset of symptoms is at least 6 months after the
stressor
308.3 Acute Stress Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Acute Stress Disorder is the development of characteristic anxiety,
dissociative, and other symptoms that occurs within 1 month after exposure to an
extreme traumatic stressor (Criterion A). For a discussion of the types of stressors
involved, see the description of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (p. 424). Either while
experiencing the traumatic event or after the event, the individual has at least three of
the following dissociative symptoms: a subjective sense of numbing, detachment, or
absence of emotional responsiveness; a reduction in awareness of his or her surround-
ings; derealization; depersonalization; or dissociative amnesia (Criterion B). Following
the trauma, the traumatic event is persistently reexperienced (Criterion C), and the
individual displays marked avoidance of stimuli that may arouse recollections of the
trauma (Criterion D) and has marked symptoms of anxiety or increased arousal
(Criterion E). The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress, significantly
interfere with normal functioning, or impair the individual's ability to pursue necessary
tasks (Criterion F). The disturbance lasts for at least 2 days and does not persist beyond
4 weeks after the traumatic event (Criterion G). The symptoms are not due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general
medical condition, are not better accounted for by Brief Psychotic Disorder, and are not
merely an exacerbation of a preexisting mental disorder (Criterion H).
As a response to the traumatic event, the individual develops dissociative symptoms.
Individuals with Acute Stress Disorder have a decrease in emotional responsiveness,
often finding it difficult or impossible to experience pleasure in previously enjoyable
activities, and frequently feel guilty about pursuing usual life tasks. They may experience
difficulty concentrating, feel detached from their bodies, experience the world as unreal
or dreamlike, or have increasing difficulty recalling specific details of the traumatic event
(dissociative amnesia). In addition, at least one symptom from each of the symptom
clusters required for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder is present. First, the traumatic event430
Anxiety Disorders
is persistently reexperienced (e.g., recurrent recollections, images, thoughts, dreams,
illusions, flashback episodes, a sense of reliving the event, or distress on exposure to
reminders of the event). Second, reminders of the trauma (e.g., places, people, activities)
are avoided. Finally, hyperarousal in response to stimuli reminiscent of the trauma is
present (e.g., difficulty sleeping, irritability, poor concentration, hypervigilance, an
exaggerated startle response, and motor restlessness).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Symptoms of despair and
hopelessness may be experienced in Acute Stress Disorder and may be sufficiently severe
and persistent to meet criteria for a Major Depressive Episode, in which case an additional
diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder may be warranted. If the trauma led to another's
death or to serious injury, survivors may feel guilt about having remained intact or about
not providing enough help to others. Individuals with this disorder often perceive
themselves to have greater responsibility for the consequences of the trauma than is
warranted. Problems may result from the individual's neglect of basic health and safety
needs associated with the aftermath of the trauma. Individuals with this disorder are at
increased risk for the development of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Impulsive and
risk-taking behavior may occur after the trauma.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
General medical conditions may occur as a consequence of the trauma (e.g., head injury,
burns).
Specific Culture Features
Although some events are likely to be universally experienced as traumatic, the severity
and pattern of response may be modulated by cultural differences in the implications
of loss. There may also be culturally prescribed coping behaviors that are characteristic
of particular cultures. For example, dissociative symptoms may be a more prominent
part of the acute stress response in cultures in which such behaviors are sanctioned. For
further discussion of cultural factors related to traumatic events, see p. 426.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Acute Stress Disorder in a population exposed to a serious traumatic
stress depends on the severity and persistence of the trauma and the degree of exposure
to it.
Course
Symptoms of Acute Stress Disorder are experienced during or immediately after the
trauma, last for at least 2 days, and either resolve within 4 weeks after the conclusion
of the traumatic event or the diagnosis is changed. When symptoms persist beyond
1 month, a diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder may be appropriate if the full
criteria for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder are met. The severity, duration, and proximit
of an individual's exposure to the traumatic event are the most important factors in
determining the likelihood of development of Acute Stress Disorder. There is some308.3 Acute Stress Disorder
431
evidence that social supports, family history, childhood experiences, personality vari-
ables, and preexisting mental disorders may influence the development of Acute Stress
Disorder. This disorder can develop in individuals without any predisposing conditions,
particularly if the stressor is especially extreme.
Differential Diagnosis
Some symptomatology following exposure to an extreme stress is ubiquitous and often
does not require any diagnosis. Acute Stress Disorder should only be considered if the
symptoms last at least 2 days and cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or impair the individual's
ability to pursue some necessary task (e.g., obtaining necessary assistance or mobilizing
personal resources by telling family members about the traumatic experience).
Acute Stress Disorder must be distinguished from a Mental Disorder Due to a
General Medical Condition (e.g., head trauma) (see p. 165) and from a Substance-
Induced Disorder (e.g., related to Alcohol Intoxication) (see p. 192), which may be
common consequences of exposure to an extreme stressor. In some individuals,
psychotic symptoms may occur following an extreme stressor. In such cases, Brief
Psychotic Disorder is diagnosed instead of Acute Stress Disorder. If a Major Depres-
sive Episode develops after the trauma, a diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder should
be considered in addition to a diagnosis of Acute Stress Disorder. A separate diagnosis
of Acute Stress Disorder should not be made if the symptoms are an exacerbation of
a preexisting mental disorder.
By definition, a diagnosis of Acute Stress Disorder is appropriate only for symptoms
that occur within 1 month of the extreme stressor. Because Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder requires more than 1 month of symptoms, this diagnosis cannot be made
during this initial 1-month period. For individuals with the diagnosis of Acute Stress
Disorder whose symptoms persist for longer than 1 month, the diagnosis of Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder should be considered. For individuals who have an extreme stressor but
who develop a symptom pattern that does not meet criteria for Acute Stress Disorder,
a diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder should be considered.
Malingering must be ruled out in those situations in which financial remuneration,
benefit eligibility, or forensic determinations play a role.
Diagnostic criteria for 308.3 Acute Stress Disorder
A. The person has been exposed to a traumatic event in which both of the
following were present:
(1) the person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an
event or events that involved actual or threatened death or serious
injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of self or others
(2) the person's response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror
B. Either while experiencing or after experiencing the distressing event, the
individual has three (or more) of the following dissociative symptoms:
(continued)432
Anxiety Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 308.3 Acute Stress Disorder
(continued)
(1) a subjective sense of numbing, detachment, or absence of
emotional responsiveness
(2) a reduction in awareness of his or her surroundings (e.g., "being
in a daze")
(3) derealization
(4) depersonalization
(5) dissociative amnesia (i.e., inability to recall an important aspect of
the trauma)
C. The traumatic event is persistently reexperienced in at least one of the
following ways: recurrent images, thoughts, dreams, illusions, flashback
episodes, or a sense of reliving the experience; or distress on exposure
to reminders of the traumatic event.
D. Marked avoidance of stimuli that arouse recollections of the trauma (e.g.,
thoughts, feelings, conversations, activities, places, people).
E. Marked symptoms of anxiety or increased arousal (e.g., difficulty
sleeping, irritability, poor concentration, hypervigilance, exaggerated
startle response, motor restlessness).
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or impairs
the individual's ability to pursue some necessary task, such as obtaining
necessary assistance or mobilizing personal resources by telling family
members about the traumatic experience.
G. The disturbance lasts for a minimum of 2 days and a maximum of
4 weeks and occurs within 4 weeks of the traumatic event.
H. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition, is not better accounted for by Brief Psychotic Disorder, and
is not merely an exacerbation of a preexisting Axis I or Axis II disorder.
300.02 Generalized Anxiety Disorder
(Includes Overanxious Disorder of Childhood)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Generalized Anxiety Disorder is excessive anxiety and worry
(apprehensive expectation), occurring more days than not for a period of at least
6 months, about a number of events or activities (Criterion A). The individual finds it300.02 Generalized Anxiety Disorder
433
difficult to control the worry (Criterion B). The anxiety and worry are accompanied by
at least three additional symptoms from a list that includes restlessness, being easily
fatigued, difficulty concentrating, irritability, muscle tension, and disturbed sleep (only
one additional symptom is required in children) (Criterion C). The focus of the anxiety
and worry is not confined to features of another Axis I disorder such as having a Panic
Attack (as in Panic Disorder), being embarrassed in public (as in Social Phobia), being
contaminated (as in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder), being away from home or close
relatives (as in Separation Anxiety Disorder), gaining weight (as in Anorexia Nervosa),
having multiple physical complaints (as in Somatization Disorder), or having a serious
illness (as in Hypochondriasis), and the anxiety and worry do not occur exclusively
during Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (Criterion D). Although individuals with General-
ized Anxiety Disorder may not always identify the worries as "excessive," they report
subjective distress due to constant worry, have difficulty controlling the worry, or
experience related impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning (Criterion E). The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects
of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin exposure) or a general
medical condition and does not occur exclusively during a Mood Disorder, a Psychotic
Disorder, or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder (Criterion F).
The intensity, duration, or frequency of the anxiety and worry is far out of proportion
to the actual likelihood or impact of the feared event. The person finds it difficult to
keep worrisome thoughts from interfering with attention to tasks at hand and has
difficulty stopping the worry. Adults with Generalized Anxiety Disorder often worry
about everyday, routine life circumstances such as possible job responsibilities, finances,
the health of family members, misfortune to their children, or minor matters (such as
household chores, car repairs, or being late for appointments). Children with Generalized
Anxiety Disorder tend to worry excessively about their competence or the quality of
their performance. During the course of the disorder, the focus of worry may shift from
one concern to another.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated with muscle tension, there may be trembling, twitching, feeling shaky, and
muscle aches or soreness. Many individuals with Generalized Anxiety Disorder also
experience somatic symptoms (e.g., cold, clammy hands; dry mouth; sweating; nausea
or diarrhea; urinary frequency; trouble swallowing or a "lump in the throat") and an
exaggerated startle response. Depressive symptoms are also common.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder very frequently co-occurs with Mood Disorders (e.g.,
Major Depressive Disorder or Dysthymic Disorder), with other Anxiety Disorders (e.g.,
Panic Disorder, Social Phobia, Specific Phobia), and with Substance-Related Disorders
(e.g., Alcohol or Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence or Abuse). Other
conditions that may be associated with stress (e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, headaches)
frequently accompany Generalized Anxiety Disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
There is considerable cultural variation in the expression of anxiety (e.g., in some
cultures, anxiety is expressed predominantly through somatic symptoms, in others
through cognitive symptoms). It is important to consider the cultural context when434
Anxiety Disorders
evaluating whether worries about certain situations are excessive.
In children and adolescents with Generalized Anxiety Disorder, the anxieties and
worries often concern the quality of their performance or competence at school or in
sporting events, even when their performance is not being evaluated by others. There
may be excessive concerns about punctuality. They may also worry about catastrophic
events such as earthquakes or nuclear war. Children with the disorder may be overly
conforming, perfectionist, and unsure of themselves and tend to redo tasks because of
excessive dissatisfaction with less-than-perfect performance. They are typically over-
zealous in seeking approval and require excessive reassurance about their performance
and their other worries.
In clinical settings, the disorder is diagnosed somewhat more frequently in women
than in men (about 55%-60% of those presenting with the disorder are female). In
epidemiological studies, the sex ratio is approximately two-thirds female.
Prevalence
In a community sample, the 1-year prevalence rate for Generalized Anxiety Disorder
was approximately 3%, and the lifetime prevalence rate was 5%. In anxiety disorder
clinics, approximately 12% of the individuals present with Generalized Anxiety Disorder.
Course
Many individuals with Generalized Anxiety Disorder report that they have felt anxious
and nervous all their lives. Although over half of those presenting for treatment report
onset in childhood or adolescence, onset occurring after age 20 years is not uncommon.
The course is chronic but fluctuating and often worsens during times of stress.
Familial Pattern
Anxiety as a trait has a familial association. Inconsistent findings have been reported
regarding familial patterns for Generalized Anxiety Disorder, with most reports failing
to find specific familial aggregation.
Differential Diagnosis
Generalized Anxiety Disorder must be distinguished from an Anxiety Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Anxiety Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition if the anxiety symptoms are judged to be a direct physiological
consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., pheochromocytoma, hyper-
thyroidism) (see p. 436). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination. A Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder is distinguished from
Generalized Anxiety Disorder by the fact that a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a
medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the anxiety
disturbance (see p. 439). For example, severe anxiety that occurs only in the context of
heavy coffee consumption would be diagnosed as Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder,
With Generalized Anxiety.
When another Axis I disorder is present, an additional diagnosis of Generalized
Anxiety Disorder should be made only when the focus of the anxiety and worry is
unrelated to the other disorder, that is, the excessive worry is not restricted to having a300.02 Generalized Anxiety Disorder
435
Panic Attack (as in Panic Disorder), being embarrassed in public (as in Social Phobia),
being contaminated (as in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder), gaining weight (as in
Anorexia Nervosa), having a serious illness (as inHypochondriasis), having multiple
physical complaints (as in Somatization Disorder), or to concerns about the welfare
of close relations or being away from them or from home (as in Separation Anxiety
Disorder). For example, the anxiety present in Social Phobia is focused on upcoming
social situations in which the individual must perform or be evaluated by others, whereas
individuals with Generalized Anxiety Disorder experience anxiety whether or not they
are being evaluated.
Several features distinguish the excessive worry of Generalized Anxiety Disorder
from the obsessional thoughts of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Obsessional
thoughts are not simply excessive worries about everyday or real-life problems, but
rather are ego-dystonic intrusions that often take the form of urges, impulses, and images
in addition to thoughts. Finally, most obsessions are accompanied by compulsions that
reduce the anxiety associated with the obsessions.
Anxiety is invariably present in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Generalized
Anxiety Disorder is not diagnosed if the anxiety occurs exclusively during the course of
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Anxiety may also be present in Adjustment Disorder,
but this residual category should be used only when the criteria are not met for any
other Anxiety Disorder (including Generalized Anxiety Disorder). Moreover, in Adjust-
ment Disorder the anxiety occurs in response to a life stressor and does not persist for
more than 6 months after the termination of the stressor or its consequences. Generalized
anxiety is a common associated feature of Mood Disorders and Psychotic Disorders
and should not be diagnosed separately if it occurs exclusively during the course of
these conditions.
Several features distinguish Generalized Anxiety Disorder from nonpathological
anxiety. First, the worries associated with Generalized Anxiety Disorder are difficult to
control and typically interfere significantly with functioning, whereas the worries of
everyday life are perceived as more controllable and can be put off until later. Second,
the worries associated with Generalized Anxiety Disorder are more pervasive, pro-
nounced, distressing, and of longer duration and frequently occur without precipitants.
The more life circumstances about which a person worries excessively (finances,
children's safety, job performance, car repairs), the more likely the diagnosis. Third,
everyday worries are much less likely to be accompanied by physical symptoms (e.g.,
excessive fatigue, restlessness, feeling keyed up or on edge, irritability), although this is
less true of children.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.02 Generalized Anxiety
Disorder
A. Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring
more days than not for at least 6 months, about a number of events or
activities (such as work or school performance).
B. The person finds it difficult to control the worry.
(continued)436
Anxiety Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.02 Generalized Anxiety
Disorder (continued)
C. The anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the
following six symptoms (with at least some symptoms present for more
days than not for the past 6 months). Note: Only one item is required
in children.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge
being easily fatigued
difficulty concentrating or mind going blank
irritability
muscle tension
sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless
unsatisfying sleep)
D. The focus of the anxiety and worry is not confined to features of an
Axis I disorder, e.g., the anxiety or worry is not about having a Panic
Attack (as in Panic Disorder), being embarrassed in public (as in Social
Phobia), being contaminated (as in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder),
being away from home or close relatives (as in Separation Anxiety
Disorder), gaining weight (as in Anorexia Nervosa), having multiple
physical complaints (as in Somatization Disorder), or having a serious
illness (as in Hypochondriasis), and the anxiety and worry do not occur
exclusively during Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
E. The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
F. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism) and does not occur exclusively during
a Mood Disorder, a Psychotic Disorder, or a Pervasive Developmental
Disorder.
293.89 Anxiety Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is clinically
significant anxiety that is judged to be due to the direct physiological effects of a general
medical condition. Symptoms can include prominent, generalized anxiety symptoms,
Panic Attacks, or obsessions or compulsions (Criterion A). There must be evidence from
the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct293.89 Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
437
physiological consequence of a general medical condition (Criterion B). The disturbance
is not better accounted for by another mental disorder, such as Adjustment Disorder
With Anxiety, in which the stressor is the general medical condition (Criterion C). The
diagnosis is not made if the anxiety symptoms occur only during the course of a delirium
(Criterion D). The anxiety symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E).
In determining whether the anxiety symptoms are due to a general medical
condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition.
Further, the clinician must establish that the anxiety symptoms are etiologically related
to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and
comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment.
Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship
between the anxiety symptoms and the general medical condition is etiological, several
considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence
of a temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general
medical condition and the anxiety symptoms. A second consideration is the presence
of features that are atypical of a primary Anxiety Disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or
course, or absence of family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there
can be a direct association between the general medical condition in question and the
development of anxiety symptoms may provide a useful context in the assessment of a
particular situation. In addition, the clinician must also judge that the disturbance is not
better accounted for by a primary Anxiety Disorder, a Substance-Induced Anxiety
Disorder, or other primary mental disorders (e.g., Adjustment Disorder). These determi-
nations are explained in greater detail in the "Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical
Condition" section (p. 165).
Specifiers
The following specifiers can be used to indicate which symptom presentation predom-
inates in Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition:
With Generalized Anxiety. This specifier may be used if excessive anxiety or
worry about a number of events or activities predominates in the clinical
presentation.
With Panic Attacks. This specifier may be used if Panic Attacks (see p. 394)
predominate in the clinical presentation.
With Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms. This specifier may be used if obses-
sions or compulsions predominate in the clinical presentation.
Recording Procedures
In recording the diagnosis of Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, the
clinician should first note the presence of the Anxiety Disorder, then the identified
general medical condition judged to be causing the disturbance, and finally the
appropriate specifier indicating the predominant symptom presentation on Axis I (e.g.,
293.89 Anxiety Disorder Due to Thyrotoxicosis, With Generalized Anxiety). The
ICD-9-CM code for the general medical condition should also be noted on Axis III (e.g.,
242.9 thyrotoxicosis). See Appendix G for a list of ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for selected
general medical conditions.438
Anxiety Disorders
Associated General Medical Conditions
A variety of general medical conditions may cause anxiety symptoms, including
endocrine conditions (e.g., hyper- and hypothyroidism, pheochromocytoma, hypo-
glycemia, hyperadrenocorticism), cardiovascular conditions (e.g., congestive heart fail-
ure, pulmonary embolism, arrhythmia), respiratory- conditions (e.g., chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, pneumonia, hyperventilation), metabolic conditions (e.g., vitamin
B 12 deficiency, porphyria), and neurological conditions (e.g., neoplasms, vestibular
dysfunction, encephalitis). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory
findings, and patterns of prevalence or onset reflect the etiological general medical
condition.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is not
given if the anxiety disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. If
the presentation includes a mix of different types of symptoms (e.g., mood and anxiety),
the specific Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition depends on which
symptoms predominate in the clinical picture.
If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance use (including medications
with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure to a toxin, a
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder should be considered. It may be useful to obtain
a urine or blood drug screen or other appropriate laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that
occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of) Substance Intoxication or
Withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a Substance-Induced
Anxiety Disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance used. If
the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a general medical
condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., Anxiety Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder) can be given.
Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition should be distinguished from
a primary Anxiety Disorder (especially Panic Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder,
and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder) and from Adjustment Disorder With Anxiety
or With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood (e.g., a maladaptive response to the
stress of having a general medical condition). In primary mental disorders, no specific
and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a general medical
condition can be demonstrated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family
history of Anxiety Disorders suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the
diagnosis of Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. In addition, anxiety
symptoms may be an associated feature of another mental disorder (e.g., Schizo-
phrenia, Anorexia Nervosa).
Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is diagnosed if the clinician cannot
determine whether the anxiety disturbance is primary, substance induced, or due to a
general medical condition.Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder
439
I Diagnostic criteria for 293.89 Anxiety Disorder
Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. Prominent anxiety, Panic Attacks, or obsessions or compulsions pre-
dominate in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of
a general medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., Adjustment Disorder With Anxiety in which the stressor is a serious
general medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With Generalized Anxiety: if excessive anxiety or worry about a number
of events or activities predominates in the clinical presentation
With Panic Attacks: if Panic Attacks (see p. 395) predominate in the
clinical presentation
With Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms: if obsessions or compulsions
predominate in the clinical presentation
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
293-89 Anxiety Disorder Due to Pheochromocytoma, With Generalized Anxiety;
also code the general medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder are prominent anxiety
symptoms (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the direct physiological effects of
a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin exposure) (Criterion B).
Depending on the nature of the substance and the context in which the symptoms occur
(i.e., during intoxication or withdrawal), the disturbance may involve prominent anxiety,
Panic Attacks, phobias, or obsessions or compulsions. Although the clinical presentation
of the Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder may resemble that of Panic Disorder,
Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Social Phobia, or Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, the
full criteria for one of these disorders need not be met. The disturbance must not be
better accounted for by a mental disorder (e.g., another Anxiety Disorder) that is not440
Anxiety Disorders
substance induced (Criterion C). The diagnosis is not made if the anxiety symptoms
occur only during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning (Criterion E). This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis
of Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal only when the anxiety symptoms
are in excess of those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome
and when the anxiety symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention. For a more detailed discussion of Substance-Related Disorders, see p. 175.
A Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder is distinguished from a primary Anxiety
Disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse, there
must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of
intoxication or withdrawal. Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorders arise only in associa-
tion with intoxication or withdrawal states, whereas primary Anxiety Disorders may
precede the onset of substance use or occur during times of sustained abstinence.
Because the withdrawal state for some substances (e.g., some benzodiazepines) can be
relatively protracted, the onset of the anxiety symptoms can occur up to 4 weeks after
cessation of substance use. Another consideration is the presence of features that are
atypical of a primary Anxiety Disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example,
the onset of Panic Disorder after age 45 years (which is rare) or the presence of atypical
symptoms during a Panic Attack (e.g., true vertigo; loss of balance, consciousness, or
bladder or bowel control; headaches; slurred speech; or amnesia) may suggest a
substance-induced etiology. In contrast, factors suggesting that the anxiety symptoms
are better accounted for by a primary Anxiety Disorder include persistence of anxiety
symptoms for a substantial period of time (i.e., about a month) after the end of Substance
Intoxication or acute Withdrawal; the development of symptoms that are substantially
in excess of what would be expected given the type or amount of the substance used
or the duration of use; or a history of prior recurrent primary Anxiety Disorders.
Specifiers
The following specifiers can be used to indicate which symptom presentation pre-
dominates:
With Generalized Anxiety. This specifier may be used if excessive anxiety or
worry about a number of events or activities predominates in the clinical
presentation.
With Panic Attacks. This specifier may be used if Panic Attacks (see p. 394)
predominate in the clinical presentation.
With Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms. This specifier may be used if obses-
sions or compulsions predominate in the clinical presentation.
With Phobic Symptoms. This specifier may be used if phobic symptoms
predominate in the clinical presentation.
The context of the development of the anxiety symptoms may be indicated by using
one of the following specifiers:
With Onset During Intoxication. This specifier should be used if criteria for
intoxication with the substance are met and the symptoms develop during the
intoxication syndrome.Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder
441
With Onset During Withdrawal. This specifier should be used if criteria for
withdrawal from the substance are met and the symptoms develop during, or
shortly after, a withdrawal syndrome.
Recording Procedures
The name of the diagnosis of Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder begins with the
specific substance (e.g., alcohol, methylphenidate, thyroxine) that is presumed to be
causing the anxiety symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the listing of classes
of substances provided in the criteria set. For substances that do not fit into any of the
classes (e.g., thyroxine), the code for "Other Substance" should be used. In addition, for
medications prescribed at therapeutic doses, the specific medication can be indicated
by listing the appropriate E-code on Axis I (see Appendix G). The name of the disorder
(e.g., Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder) is followed by the specification of the
predominant symptom presentation and the context in which the symptoms developed
(e.g., 292.89 Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Panic Attacks, With Onset During
Intoxication). When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the
development of anxiety symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., 292.89
Cocaine-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Generalized Anxiety, With Onset During
Intoxication; 291.8 Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder, With Generalized Anxiety, With
Onset During Withdrawal). If a substance is judged to be the etiological factor, but the
specific substance or class of substances is unknown, the category 292.89 Unknown
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder should be used.
Specific Substances
Anxiety Disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes
of substances: alcohol; amphetamine and related substances; caffeine; cannabis; cocaine;
hallucinogens; inhalants; phencyclidine and related substances; and other or unknown
substances. Anxiety Disorders can occur in association with withdrawal from the
following classes of substances: alcohol; cocaine; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics;
and other or unknown substances.
Some of the medications reported to evoke anxiety symptoms include anesthetics
and analgesics, sympathomimetics or other bronchodilators, anticholinergics, insulin,
thyroid preparations, oral contraceptives, antihistamines, antiparkinsonian medications,
corticosteroids, antihypertensive and cardiovascular medications, anticonvulsants, lith-
ium carbonate, antipsychotic medications, and antidepressant medications. Heavy metals
and toxins (e.g., volatile substances such as gasoline and paint, organophosphate
insecticides, nerve gases, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide) may also cause anxiety
symptoms.
Differential
Diagnosis
Anxiety symptoms commonly occur in Substance Intoxication and Substance With-
drawal. The diagnosis of the substance-specific intoxication or substance-specific
withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance
Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal only when the anxiety symptoms are judged to442
Anxiety Disorders
be in excess of those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome
and when the anxiety symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention. For example, anxiety symptoms are a characteristic feature of Alcohol
Withdrawal. Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder should be diagnosed instead of Alcohol
Withdrawal only if the anxiety symptoms are more severe than those usually encountered
with Alcohol Withdrawal and are sufficiently severe to be a separate focus of attention
and treatment. If substance-induced anxiety symptoms occur exclusively during the
course of a delirium, the anxiety symptoms are considered to be an associated feature
of the delirium and are not diagnosed separately. In substance-induced presentations
that contain a mix of different types of symptoms (e.g., mood, psychotic, and
anxiety), the specific type of Substance-Induced Disorder to be diagnosed depends on
which type of symptoms predominates in the clinical presentation.
A Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder is distinguished from a primary Anxiety
Disorder by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms
(see p. 440).
A Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental
disorder or general medical condition must have its onset while the person is receiving
the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal syndrome is associated with the
medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the anxiety symptoms will usually remit
within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance and the
presence of a withdrawal syndrome). If symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes
for the anxiety symptoms should be considered.
Because individuals with general medical conditions often take medications for
those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the anxiety symptoms
are caused by the physiological consequences of the general medical condition rather
than the medication, in which case Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a
judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the general medical condition (e.g.,
medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically for
that person whether or not the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has
ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a general medical condition and substance
use, both diagnoses (i.e., Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition and
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder) may be given. When there is insufficient evidence
to determine whether the anxiety symptoms are due to a substance (including a
medication) or to a general medical condition or are primary (i.e., not due to either a
substance or a general medical condition), Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
would be indicated.Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder
443
I Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced
Anxiety Disorder
A. Prominent anxiety, Panic Attacks, or obsessions or compulsions pre-
dominate in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of either (1) or (2):
(1) the symptoms in Criterion A developed during, or within 1 month
of, Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal
(2) medication use is etiologically related to the disturbance
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by an Anxiety Disorder that
is not substance induced. Evidence that the symptoms are better
accounted for by an Anxiety Disorder that is not substance induced
might include the following: the symptoms precede the onset of the
substance use (or medication use); the symptoms persist for a substantial
period of time (e.g., about a month) after the cessation of acute
withdrawal or severe intoxication or are substantially in excess of what
would be expected given the type or amount of the substance used or
the duration of use; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence
of an independent non-substance-induced Anxiety Disorder (e.g., a
history of recurrent non-substance-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxi-
cation or Substance Withdrawal only when the anxiety symptoms are in excess of
those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when
the anxiety symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention.
Code (Specific Substancej-Induced Anxiety Disorder
(291.8 Alcohol; 292.89 Amphetamine (or Amphetamine-Like Substance);
292.89 Caffeine; 292.89 Cannabis; 292.89 Cocaine; 292.89 Hallucinogen;
292.89 Inhalant; 292.89 Phencyclidine (or Phencyclidine-Like Substance);
292.89 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic; 292.89 Other [or Unknown]
Substance)
Specify if:
With Generalized Anxiety: if excessive anxiety or worry about a number
of events or activities predominates in the clinical presentation
With Panic Attacks: if Panic Attacks (see p. 395) predominate in the
clinical presentation
(continued)444
Anxiety Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Anxiety
Disorder (continued)
With Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms: if obsessions or compulsions
predominate in the clinical presentation
With Phobic Symptoms: if phobic symptoms predominate in the clinical
presentation
Specify if (see table on p. 177 for applicability by substance):
With Onset During Intoxication: if the criteria are met for Intoxication
with the substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication
syndrome
With Onset During Withdrawal: if criteria are met for Withdrawal from
the substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, a
withdrawal syndrome
300.00 Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category includes disorders with prominent anxiety or phobic avoidance that do
not meet criteria for any specific Anxiety Disorder, Adjustment Disorder With Anxiety,
or Adjustment Disorder With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood. Examples include
1. Mixed anxiety-depressive disorder: clinically significant symptoms of anxiety and
depression, but the criteria are not met for either a specific Mood Disorder or a
specific Anxiety Disorder (see p. 723 for suggested research criteria)
2. Clinically significant social phobic symptoms that are related to the social impact
of having a general medical condition or mental disorder (e.g., Parkinson's
disease, dermatological conditions, Stuttering, Anorexia Nervosa, Body Dys-
morphic Disorder)
3. Situations in which the clinician has concluded that an Anxiety Disorder is
present but is unable to determine whether it is primary, due to a general medical
condition, or substance inducedSomatoform Disorders
T
he common feature of the Somatoform Disorders is the presence of physical
symptoms that suggest a general medical condition (hence, the term somatoform)
and are not fully explained by a general medical condition, by the direct effects of a
substance, or by another mental disorder (e.g., Panic Disorder). The symptoms must
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas
of functioning. In contrast to Factitious Disorders and Malingering, the physical
symptoms are not intentional (i.e., under voluntary control). Somatoform Disorders differ
from Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition in that there is no diagnosable
general medical condition to fully account for the physical symptoms. The grouping of
these disorders in a single section is based on clinical utility (i.e., the need to exclude
occult general medical conditions or substance-induced etiologies for the bodily
symptoms) rather than on assumptions regarding shared etiology or mechanism. These
disorders are often encountered in general medical settings.
The following Somatoform Disorders are included in this section:
Somatization Disorder (historically referred to as hysteria or Briquet's syndrome)
is a polysymptomatic disorder that begins before age 30 years, extends over a period of
years, and is characterized by a combination of pain, gastrointestinal, sexual, and
pseudoneurological symptoms.
Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder is characterized by unexplained physical
complaints, lasting at least 6 months, that are below the threshold for a diagnosis of
Somatization Disorder.
Conversion Disorder involves unexplained symptoms or deficits affecting volun-
tary motor or sensory function that suggest a neurological or other general medical
condition. Psychological factors are judged to be associated with the symptoms or
deficits.
Pain Disorder is characterized by pain as the predominant focus of clinical
attention. In addition, psychological factors are judged to have an important role in its
onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance.
Hypochondriasis is the preoccupation with the fear of having, or the idea that
one has, a serious disease based on the person's misinterpretation of bodily symptoms
or bodily functions.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder is the preoccupation with an imagined or exaggerated
defect in physical appearance.
Somatoform Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding disorders
with somatoform symptoms that do not meet the criteria for any of the specific
Somatoform Disorders.
445446
Somatoform Disorders
300.81 Somatization Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Somatization Disorder is a pattern of recurring, multiple, clinically
significant somatic complaints. A somatic complaint is considered to be clinically
significant if it results in medical treatment (e.g., the taking of medication) or causes
significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
The somatic complaints must begin before age 30 years and occur over a period of
several years (Criterion A). The multiple somatic complaints cannot be fully explained
by any known general medical condition or the direct effects of a substance. If they
occur in the presence of a general medical condition, the physical complaints or resulting
social or occupational impairment are in excess of what would be expected from the
history, physical examination, or laboratory tests (Criterion C). There must be a history
of pain related to at least four different sites (e.g., head, abdomen, back, joints,
extremities, chest, rectum) or functions (e.g., menstruation, sexual intercourse, urination)
(Criterion Bl). There also must be a history of at least two gastrointestinal symptoms
other than pain (Criterion B2). Most individuals with the disorder describe the presence
of nausea and abdominal bloating. Vomiting, diarrhea, and food intolerance are less
common. Gastrointestinal complaints often lead to frequent X-ray examinations and can
result in abdominal surgery that in retrospect was unnecessary. There must be a history
of at least one sexual or reproductive symptom other than pain (Criterion B3). In women,
this may consist of irregular menses, menorrhagia, or vomiting throughout pregnancy.
In men, there may be symptoms such as erectile or ejaculatory dysfunction. Both women
and men may be subject to sexual indifference. Finally, there must also be a history of
at least one symptom, other than pain, that suggests a neurological condition (conversion
symptoms such as impaired coordination or balance, paralysis or localized weakness,
difficulty swallowing or lump in throat, aphonia, urinary retention, hallucinations, loss
of touch or pain sensation, double vision, blindness, deafness, or seizures; dissociative
symptoms such as amnesia; or loss of consciousness other than fainting) (Criterion B4).
The symptoms in each of the groups have been listed in the approximate order of their
reported frequency. Finally, the unexplained symptoms in Somatization Disorder are not
intentionally feigned or produced (as in Factitious Disorder or Malingering) (Criterion D).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with Somati-
zation Disorder usually describe their complaints in colorful, exaggerated terms, but
specific factual information is often lacking. They are often inconsistent historians, so
that a checklist approach to diagnostic interviewing may be less effective than a thorough
review of medical treatments and hospitalizations to document a pattern of frequent
somatic complaints. They often seek treatment from several physicians concurrently,
which may lead to complicated and sometimes hazardous combinations of treatments.
Prominent anxiety symptoms and depressed mood are very common and may be the
reason for being seen in mental health settings. There may be impulsive and antisocial
behavior, suicide threats and attempts, and marital discord. The lives of these individuals,
particularly those with associated Personality Disorders, are often as chaotic and
complicated as their medical histories. Frequent use of medications may lead to side300.81 Somatization Disorder
447
effects and Substance-Related Disorders. These individuals commonly undergo numer-
ous medical examinations, diagnostic procedures, surgeries, and hospitalizations, which
expose the person to an increased risk of morbidity associated with these procedures.
Major Depressive Disorder, Panic Disorder, and Substance-Related Disorders are fre-
quently associated with Somatization Disorder. Histrionic, Borderline, and Antisocial
Personality Disorders are the most frequently associated Personality Disorders.
Associated laboratory findings. Laboratory test results are remarkable for the ab-
sence of findings to support the subjective complaints.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Physical examination is remarkable for the absence of objective findings to fully explain
the many subjective complaints of individuals with Somatization Disorder. These
individuals may be diagnosed with so-called functional disorders (e.g., irritable bowel
syndrome). However, because these syndromes are as yet without established objective
signs or specific laboratory findings, their symptoms may count toward a diagnosis of
Somatization Disorder.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
The type and frequency of somatic symptoms may differ across cultures. For example,
burning hands and feet or the nondelusional experience of worms in the head or ants
crawling under the skin represent pseudoneurological symptoms that are more common
in Africa and South Asia than in North America. Symptoms related to male reproductive
function may be more prevalent in cultures in which there is widespread concern about
semen loss (e.g., dhat syndrome in India). Accordingly, the symptom reviews should
be adjusted to the culture. The symptoms listed in this manual are examples that have
been found most diagnostic in the United States. It should be noted that the order of
frequency was derived from studies done in the United States.
Somatization Disorder occurs only rarely in men in the United States, but the higher
reported frequency in Greek and Puerto Rican men suggests that cultural factors may
influence the sex ratio.
Prevalence
Studies have reported widely variable lifetime prevalence rates of Somatization Disorder,
ranging from 0.2% to 2% among women and less than 0.2% in men. Differences in rates
may depend on whether the interviewer is a physician, on the method of assessment,
and on the demographic variables in the samples studied. When nonphysician inter-
viewers are used, Somatization Disorder is much less frequently diagnosed.
Course
Somatization Disorder is a chronic but fluctuating disorder that rarely remits completely.
A year seldom passes without the individual seeking some medical attention prompted
by unexplained somatic complaints. Diagnostic criteria are typically met before age
25 years, but initial symptoms are often present by adolescence. Menstrual difficulties
may be one of the earliest symptoms in women. Sexual symptoms are often associated
with marital discord.448
Somatoform Disorders
Familial Pattern
Somatization Disorder is observed in 10%-20% of female first-degree biological relatives
of women with Somatization Disorder. The male relatives of women with this disorder
show an increased risk of Antisocial Personality Disorder and Substance-Related
Disorders. Adoption studies indicate that both genetic and environmental factors
contribute to the risk for Antisocial Personality Disorder, Substance-Related Disorders,
and Somatization Disorder. Having a biological or adoptive parent with any of these
disorders increases the risk of developing either Antisocial Personality Disorder, a
Substance-Related Disorder, or Somatization Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
The symptom picture encountered in Somatization Disorder is frequently nonspecific
and can overlap with a multitude of general medical conditions. Three features that
suggest a diagnosis of Somatization Disorder rather than a general medical condition
include 1) involvement of multiple organ systems, 2) early onset and chronic course
without development of physical signs or structural abnormalities, and 3) absence of
laboratory abnormalities that are characteristic of the suggested general medical condi-
tion. It is still necessary to rule out general medical conditions that are characterized by
vague, multiple, and confusing somatic symptoms (e.g., hyperparathyroidism, acute
intermittent porphyria, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus). Moreover,
Somatization Disorder does not protect individuals from having other independent
general medical conditions. Objective findings should be evaluated without undue
reliance on subjective complaints. The onset of multiple physical symptoms late in life
is almost always due to a general medical condition.
Schizophrenia with multiple somatic delusions needs to be differentiated from the
nondelusional somatic complaints of individuals with Somatization Disorder. In rare
instances, individuals with Somatization Disorder also have Schizophrenia, in which case
both diagnoses should be noted. Furthermore, hallucinations can occur as pseudoneuro-
logical symptoms and must be distinguished from the typical hallucinations seen in
Schizophrenia (see p. 275).
It can be very difficult to distinguish between Anxiety Disorders and Somatization
Disorder. In Panic Disorder, multiple somatic symptoms are also present, but these
occur primarily during Panic Attacks. However, Panic Disorder may coexist with
Somatization Disorder; when the somatic symptoms occur at times other than during
Panic Attacks, both diagnoses may be made. Individuals with Generalized Anxiety
Disorder may have a multitude of physical complaints associated with their generalized
anxiety, but the focus of the anxiety and worry is not limited to the physical complaints.
Individuals with Mood Disorders, particularly Depressive Disorders, may present
with somatic complaints, most commonly headache, gastrointestinal disturbances, or
unexplained pain. Individuals with Somatization Disorder have physical complaints recur-
rently throughout most of their lives, regardless of their current mood state, whereas physical
complaints in Depressive Disorders are limited to episodes of depressed mood. Individuals
with Somatization Disorder also often present with depressive complaints. If criteria are met
for both Somatization Disorder and a Mood Disorder, both may be diagnosed.
By definition, all individuals with Somatization Disorder have a history of pain
symptoms, sexual symptoms, and conversion or dissociative symptoms. Therefore, if
these symptoms occur exclusively during the course of Somatization Disorder, there300.81 Somatization Disorder
449
should not be an additional diagnosis of Pain Disorder Associated With Psycholog-
ical Factors, a Sexual Dysfunction, Conversion Disorder, or a Dissociative
Disorder. Hypochondriasis is not be diagnosed if preoccupation with fears of having
a serious illness occurs exclusively during the course of Somatization Disorder.
The criteria for Somatization Disorder in this manual are slightly more restrictive
than the original criteria for Briquet's syndrome. Somatoform presentations that do
not meet criteria for Somatization Disorder should be classified as Undifferentiated
Somatoform Disorder if the duration of the syndrome is 6 months or longer, or
Somatoform Disorder Not Otherwise Specified for presentations of shorter duration.
In Factitious Disorder With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symptoms and
Malingering, somatic symptoms may be intentionally produced to assume the sick role
or for gain, respectively. Symptoms that are intentionally produced should not count
toward a diagnosis of Somatization Disorder. However, the presence of some factitious
or malingered symptoms, mixed with other nonintentional symptoms, is not uncommon.
In such mixed cases, both Somatization Disorder and a Factitious Disorder or Malingering
should be diagnosed.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.81 Somatization Disorder
A. A history of many physical complaints beginning before age 30 years
that occur over a period of several years and result in treatment being
sought or significant impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning.
B. Each of the following criteria must have been met, with individual
symptoms occurring at any time during the course of the disturbance:
(1) four pain symptoms: a history of pain related to at least four
different sites or functions (e.g., head, abdomen, back, joints,
extremities, chest, rectum, during menstruation, during sexual
intercourse, or during urination)
(2) two gastrointestinal symptoms: a history of at least two gastro-
intestinal symptoms other than pain (e.g., nausea, bloating, vom
iting other than during pregnancy, diarrhea, or intolerance of
several different foods)
(3) one sexual symptom: a history of at least one sexual or reproduc-
tive symptom other than pain (e.g., sexual indifference, erectile or
ejaculatory dysfunction, irregular menses, excessive menstrual
bleeding, vomiting throughout pregnancy)
(4) onepseudoneurological symptom: a history of at least one symp-
tom or deficit suggesting a neurological condition not limited to
pain (conversion symptoms such as impaired coordination or
balance, paralysis or localized weakness, difficulty swallowing or
lump in throat, aphonia, urinary retention, hallucinations, loss of
touch or pain sensation, double vision, blindness, deafness, sei-
zures; dissociative symptoms such as amnesia; or loss of conscious-
ness other than fainting)
(continued)450
Somatoform Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.81 Somatization Disorder
(continued)
C. Either (1) or (2):
(1) after appropriate investigation, each of the symptoms in Criterion B
cannot be fully explained by a known general medical condition
or the direct effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication)
(2) when there is a related general medical condition, the physical
complaints or resulting social or occupational impairment are in
excess of what would be expected from the history, physical
examination, or laboratory findings
D. The symptoms are not intentionally produced or feigned (as in Factitious
Disorder or Malingering).
300.81 Un differentia ted Somatoform Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder is one or more physical
complaints (Criterion A) that persist for 6 months or longer (Criterion D). The most
frequent complaints are chronic fatigue, loss of appetite, or gastrointestinal or genito-
urinary symptoms. These symptoms cannot be fully explained by any known general
medical condition or the direct effects of a substance (e.g., the effects of injury, substance
use, or medication side effects), or the physical complaints or resultant impairment are
grossly in excess of what would be expected from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings (Criterion B). The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
C). The diagnosis is not made when the symptoms are better accounted for by another
mental disorder (e.g., another Somatoform Disorder, Sexual Dysfunction, Mood Disor-
der, Anxiety Disorder, Sleep Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder) (Criterion E). The
symptoms are not intentionally produced or feigned (as in Factitious Disorder or
Malingering) (Criterion F).
This is a residual category for those persistent somatoform presentations that do not
meet the full criteria for Somatization Disorder or another Somatoform Disorder.
Symptoms that may be seen include the examples listed for Somatization Disorder. There
may be a single circumscribed symptom, such as nausea, or, more commonly, multiple
physical symptoms. The chronic unexplained physical complaints often lead to medical
consultation, typically with a primary care physician.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Medically unexplained symptoms and worry about physical illness may constitute
culturally shaped "idioms of distress" that are employed to express concerns about a300.81 Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder
451
broad range of personal and social problems, without necessarily indicating psycho-
pathology. The highest frequency of unexplained physical complaints occurs in young
women of low socioeconomic status, but such symptoms are not limited to any age,
gender, or sociocultural group. "Neurasthenia," a syndrome described frequently in many
parts of the world and characterized by fatigue and weakness, is classified in DSM-IV
as Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder if symptoms have persisted for longer than
6 months.
Course
The course of individual unexplained physical complaints is unpredictable. The eventual
diagnosis of a general medical condition or another mental disorder is frequent.
Differential
Diagnosis
Also refer to the "Differential Diagnosis" section for Somatization Disorder (see p. 448).
Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder is differentiated from Somatization Disorder
by the requirement in Somatization Disorder of a multiplicity of symptoms of several
years' duration and an onset before age 30 years. Individuals with Somatization Disorder
are typically inconsistent historians, so that at one evaluation they may report many
symptoms that fulfill criteria for Somatization Disorder, whereas at another time they
may report many fewer symptoms that fail to meet full criteria. If the physical complaints
have persisted for less than 6 months, a diagnosis of Somatoform Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified should be made. Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder is not
diagnosed if the symptoms are better accounted for by another mental disorder. Other
mental disorders that frequently include unexplained physical complaints are Major
Depressive Disorder, Anxiety Disorders, and Adjustment Disorder. In contrast to
Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder, the physical symptoms of Factitious Disorders
and Malingering are intentionally produced or feigned. In Factitious Disorder, the
motivation is to assume the sick role and to obtain medical evaluation and treatment,
whereas in Malingering, more external incentives are apparent, such as financial
compensation, avoidance of duty, evasion of criminal prosecution, or obtaining drugs.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.81 Undifferentiated
Somatoform Disorder
A. One or more physical complaints (e.g., fatigue, loss of appetite, gastro-
intestinal or urinary complaints).
B. Either (1) or (2):
(1) after appropriate investigation, the symptoms cannot be fully
explained by a known general medical condition or the direct
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication)
(continued)452
Somatoform Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 300.81 Undifferentiated
Somatoform Disorder (continued)
(2) when there is a related general medical condition, the physical
complaints or resulting social or occupational impairment is in
excess of what would be expected from the history, physical
examination, or laboratory findings
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The duration of the disturbance is at least 6 months.
E. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., another Somatoform Disorder, Sexual Dysfunction, Mood Disor-
der, Anxiety Disorder, Sleep Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder).
F. The symptom is not intentionally produced or feigned (as in Factitious
Disorder or Malingering).
300.11 Conversion Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Conversion Disorder is the presence of symptoms or deficits
affecting voluntary motor or sensory function that suggest a neurological or other general
medical condition (Criterion A). Psychological factors are judged to be associated with
the symptom or deficit, a judgment based on the observation that the initiation or
exacerbation of the symptom or deficit is preceded by conflicts or other stressors
(Criterion B). The symptoms are not intentionally produced or feigned, as in Factitious
Disorder or Malingering (Criterion C). Conversion Disorder is not diagnosed if the
symptoms or deficits are fully explained by a neurological or other general medical
condition, by the direct effects of a substance, or as a culturally sanctioned behavior or
experience (Criterion D). The problem must be clinically significant as evidenced by
marked distress; impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning; or the fact that it warrants medical evaluation (Criterion E). Conversion
Disorder is not diagnosed if symptoms are limited to pain or sexual dysfunction, occur
exclusively during the course of Somatization Disorder, or are better accounted for by
another mental disorder (Criterion F).
Conversion symptoms are related to voluntary motor or sensory functioning and are
thus referred to as "pseudoneurological." Motor symptoms or deficits include impaired
coordination or balance, paralysis or localized weakness, aphonia, difficulty swallowing
or a sensation of a lump in the throat, and urinary retention. Sensory symptoms or deficits
include loss of touch or pain sensation, double vision, blindness, deafness, and
hallucinations. Symptoms may also include seizures or convulsions. The more medically
naive the person, the more implausible are the presenting symptoms. More sophisticated300.11 Conversion Disorder
453
persons tend to have more subtle symptoms and deficits that may closely simulate
neurological or other general medical conditions.
A diagnosis of Conversion Disorder should be made only after a thorough medical
investigation has been performed to rule out an etiological neurological or general
medical condition. Because a general medical etiology for many cases of apparent
Conversion Disorder can take years to become evident, the diagnosis should be viewed
as tentative and provisional. In early studies, general medical etiologies were later found
in from one-quarter to one-half of persons initially diagnosed with conversion symptoms.
In more recent studies, misdiagnosis is less evident, perhaps reflecting increased
awareness of the disorder, as well as improved knowledge and diagnostic techniques.
A history of other unexplained somatic (especially conversion) or dissociative symptoms
signifies a greater likelihood that an apparent conversion symptom is not due to a general
medical condition, especially if criteria for Somatization Disorder have been met in the past.
Conversion symptoms typically do not conform to known anatomical pathways and
physiological mechanisms, but instead follow the individual's conceptualization of a
condition. A "paralysis" may involve inability to perform a particular movement or to
move an entire body part, rather than a deficit corresponding to patterns of motor
innervation. Conversion symptoms are often inconsistent. A "paralyzed" extremity will
be moved inadvertently while dressing or when attention is directed elsewhere. If placed
above the head and released, a "paralyzed" arm will briefly retain its position, then fall
to the side, rather than striking the head. Unacknowledged strength in antagonistic
muscles, normal muscle tone, and intact reflexes may be demonstrated. An electro-
myogram will be normal. Difficulty swallowing will be equal with liquids and solids.
Conversion "anesthesia" of a foot or a hand may follow a so-called stocking-glove
distribution with uniform (no proximal to distal gradient) loss of all sensory modalities
(i.e., touch, temperature, and pain) sharply demarcated at an anatomical landmark rather
than according to dermatomes. A conversion "seizure" will vary from convulsion to
convulsion, and paroxysmal activity will not be evident on an EEG.
Even when following such guidelines carefully, caution must be exercised. Knowl-
edge of anatomical and physiological mechanisms is incomplete and available methods
of objective assessment have limitations. A broad range of neurological conditions may
be misdiagnosed as Conversion Disorder. Prominent among them are multiple sclerosis,
myasthenia gravis, and idiopathic or substance-induced dystonias. However, the pres-
ence of a neurological condition does not preclude a diagnosis of Conversion Disorder.
As many as one-third of individuals with conversion symptoms have a current or prior
neurological condition. Conversion Disorder may be diagnosed in the presence of a
neurological or other general medical condition if the symptoms are not fully explained
given the nature and severity of the neurological or other general medical condition.
Traditionally, the term conversion derived from the hypothesis that the individual's
somatic symptom represents a symbolic resolution of an unconscious psychological
conflict, reducing anxiety and serving to keep the conflict out of awareness ("primary
gain"). The individual might also derive "secondary gain" from the conversion symp-
tom—that is, external benefits are obtained or noxious duties or responsibilities are
evaded. Although the DSM-IV criteria set for Conversion Disorder does not necessarily
imply that the symptoms involve such constructs, it does require that psychological
factors be associated with their onset or exacerbation. Because psychological factors are
so ubiquitously present in relation to general medical conditions, it can be difficult to
establish whether a specific psychological factor is etiologically related to the symptom
or deficit. However, a close temporal relationship between a conflict or stressor and the454
Somatoform Disorders
initiation or exacerbation of a symptom may be helpful in this determination, especially
if the person has developed conversion symptoms under similar circumstances in the
past.
Although the individual may derive secondary gain from the conversion symptom,
unlike in Malingering or Factitious Disorder the symptoms are not intentionally produced
to obtain the benefits. The determination that a symptom is not intentionally produced
or feigned can also be difficult. Generally, it must be inferred from a careful evaluation
of the context in which the symptom develops, especially relative to potential external
rewards or the assumption of the sick role. Supplementing the person's self-report with
additional sources of information (e.g., from associates or records) may be helpful.
Conversion Disorder is not diagnosed if a symptom is fully explained as a culturally
sanctioned behavior or experience. For example, "visions" or "spells" that occur as part
of religious rituals in which such behaviors are encouraged and expected would not
justify a diagnosis of Conversion Disorder unless the symptom exceeded what is
contextually expected and caused undue distress or impairment. In "epidemic hysteria,"
shared symptoms develop in a circumscribed group of people following "exposure" to
a common precipitant. A diagnosis of Conversion Disorder should be made only if the
individual experiences clinically significant distress or impairment.
Subtypes
The following subtypes are noted based on the nature of the presenting symptom or
deficit:
With Motor Symptom or Deficit. This subtype includes such symptoms as
impaired coordination or balance, paralysis or localized weakness, difficulty
swallowing or "lump in throat," aphonia, and urinary retention.
With Sensory Symptom or Deficit. This subtype includes such symptoms as
loss of touch or pain sensation, double vision, blindness, deafness, and halluci-
nations.
With Seizures or Convulsions. This subtype includes seizures or convulsions
with voluntary motor or sensory components.
With Mixed Presentation. This subtype is used if symptoms of more than one
category are evident.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with conver-
sion symptoms may show la belle indifference (i.e., a relative lack of concern about the
nature or implications of the symptom) or may also present in a dramatic or histrionic
fashion. Because these individuals are often suggestible, their symptoms may be
modified or resolved based on external cues; however, it must be cautioned that this is
not specific to Conversion Disorder and may also occur with general medical conditions.
Symptoms may be more common following extreme psychosocial stress (e.g., warfare
or the recent death of a significant figure). Dependency and the adoption of a sick role
may be fostered in the course of treatment. Other nonconversion somatic complaints
are common. Associated mental disorders include Dissociative Disorders, Major Depres-
sive Disorder, and Histrionic, Antisocial, and Dependent Personality Disorders.300.11 Conversion Disorder
455
Associated laboratory findings. No specific laboratory abnormalities are associated
with Conversion Disorder. In fact, it is the absence of expected findings that suggests
and supports the diagnosis of Conversion Disorder. However, laboratory findings
consistent with a general medical condition do not exclude the diagnosis of Conversion
Disorder, because it only requires that a symptom not be fully explained by such a
condition.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Symptoms of Conversion Disorder typically do not conform to known anatomical
pathways and physiological mechanisms. Thus, expected objective signs (e.g., reflex
changes) are rarely present. However, a person may develop symptoms that resemble
those observed in others or in themselves (e.g., individuals with epilepsy may simulate
"seizures" that resemble those they have observed in others or how their own seizures
were described to them). Generally, individual conversion symptoms are self-limited
and do not lead to physical changes or disabilities. Rarely, physical changes such as
atrophy and contractures may occur as a result of disuse or as sequelae to diagnostic or
therapeutic procedures. It is important to note, however, that conversion symptoms can
occur in individuals with neurological conditions.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Conversion Disorder has been reported to be more common in rural populations,
individuals of lower socioeconomic status, and individuals less knowledgeable about
medical and psychological concepts. Higher rates of conversion symptoms are reported
in developing regions, with the incidence generally declining with increasing develop-
ment. Falling down with loss or alteration of consciousness is a feature of a variety of
culture-specific syndromes. The form of conversion symptoms reflects local cultural ideas
about acceptable and credible ways to express distress. Changes resembling conversion
symptoms (as well as dissociative symptoms) are common aspects of certain culturally
sanctioned religious and healing rituals. The clinician must assess 'whether such
symptoms are fully explained in the particular social context, and whether they result
in clinically significant distress, disability, or role impairment.
Conversion symptoms in children under age 10 years are usually limited to gait
problems or seizures. Conversion Disorder appears to be more frequent in women than
in men, with reported ratios varying from 2:1 to 10:1. Especially in women, symptom
are much more common on the left than on the right side of the body. Women (rarely
men) presenting with conversion symptoms may later manifest the full picture of
Somatization Disorder. Particularly in men, an association with Antisocial Personality
Disorder is evident. In men, Conversion Disorder is often seen in the context of industrial
accidents or the military, in which cases it must be carefully differentiated from
Malingering.
Prevalence
Reported rates of Conversion Disorder have varied widely, ranging from 11/100,000 to
300/100,000 in general population samples. It has been reported as a focus of treatment
in l%-3% of outpatient referrals to mental health clinics.456
Somatoform Disorders
Course
The onset of Conversion Disorder is generally from late childhood to early adulthood,
rarely before age 10 years or after age 35 years, but onset as late as the ninth decade of
life has been reported. When an apparent Conversion Disorder first develops in middle
or old age, the probability of an occult neurological or other general medical condition
is high. The onset of Conversion Disorder is generally acute, but gradually increasing
symptomatology may also occur. Typically, individual conversion symptoms are of short
duration. In individuals hospitalized with conversion symptoms, symptoms will remit
within 2 weeks in most cases. Recurrence is common, occurring in from one-fifth to
one-quarter of individuals within 1 year, with a single recurrence predicting future
episodes. Factors that are associated with good prognosis include acute onset, presence
of clearly identifiable stress at the time of onset, a short interval between onset and the
institution of treatment, and above average intelligence. Symptoms of paralysis, aphonia,
and blindness are associated with a good prognosis, whereas tremor and seizures are not.
Familial Pattern
Limited data suggest that conversion symptoms are more frequent in relatives of
individuals with Conversion Disorder. Increased risk of Conversion Disorder in mono-
zygotic but not in dizygotic twin pairs has been reported.
Differential
Diagnosis
The major diagnostic concern in evaluating potential conversion symptoms is the
exclusion of occult neurological or other general medical conditions and sub-
stance (including medication)-induced etiologies. Appropriate evaluation of po-
tential general medical conditions (e.g., multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis) should
include careful review of the current presentation, the overall medical history, neuro-
logical and general physical examinations, and appropriate laboratory studies, including
investigation for use of alcohol and other substances.
Pain Disorder or a Sexual Dysfunction is diagnosed instead of Conversion
Disorder if the symptoms are limited to pain or to sexual dysfunction, respectively. An
additional diagnosis of Conversion Disorder should not be made if conversion symptoms
occur exclusively during the course of Somatization Disorder. Conversion Disorder is
not diagnosed if symptoms are better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g.,
catatonic symptoms or somatic delusions in Schizophrenia or other Psychotic
Disorders or Mood Disorder or difficulty swallowing during a Panic Attack). In
Hypochondriasis, the individual is preoccupied with the "serious disease" underlying
the pseudoneurological symptoms, whereas in Conversion Disorder the focus is on the
presenting symptom and there may be la belle indifference. In Body Dysmorphic
Disorder, the emphasis is on a preoccupation with an imagined or slight defect in
appearance, rather than a change in voluntary motor or sensory function. Conversion
Disorder shares features with Dissociative Disorders. Both disorders involve symptoms
that suggest neurological dysfunction and may also have shared antecedents. If both
conversion and dissociative symptoms occur in the same individual (which is common),
both diagnoses should be made.
It is controversial whether hallucinations ("pseudohallucinations") can be considered
as the presenting symptom of Conversion Disorder. As distinguished from hallucina-300.11 Conversion Disorder
457
tions that occur in the context of a Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia or
another Psychotic Disorder, a Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition,
a Substance-Related Disorder, or a Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features), hallucina-
tions in Conversion Disorder generally occur with intact insight in the absence of other
psychotic symptoms, often involve more than one sensory modality (e.g., a hallucination
involving visual, auditory, and tactile components), and often have a naive, fantastic, or
childish content. They are often psychologically meaningful and tend to be described
by the individual as an interesting story.
Symptoms of Factitious Disorders and Malingering are intentionally produced
or feigned. In Factitious Disorder, the motivation is to assume the sick role and to obtain
medical evaluation and treatment, whereas more obvious goals such as financial
compensation, avoidance of duty, evasion of criminal prosecution, or obtaining drugs
are apparent in Malingering. Such goals may resemble "secondary gain" in conversion
symptoms, with the distinguishing feature of conversion symptoms being the lack of
conscious intent in the production of the symptom.
I Diagnostic criteria for 300.11 Conversion Disorder
A. One or more symptoms or deficits affecting voluntary motor or sensory
function that suggest a neurological or other general medical condition.
B. Psychological factors are judged to be associated with the symptom or
deficit because the initiation or exacerbation of the symptom or deficit
is preceded by conflicts or other stressors.
C. The symptom or deficit is not intentionally produced or feigned (as in
Factitious Disorder or Malingering).
D. The symptom or deficit cannot, after appropriate investigation, be fully
explained by a general medical condition, or by the direct effects of a
substance, or as a culturally sanctioned behavior or experience.
E. The symptom or deficit causes clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or
warrants medical evaluation.
F. The symptom or deficit is not limited to pain or sexual dysfunction, does
not occur exclusively during the course of Somatization Disorder, and
is not better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Specify type of symptom or deficit:
With Motor Symptom or Deficit
With Sensory Symptom or Deficit
With Seizures or Convulsions
With Mixed Presentation458
Somatoform Disorders
Pain Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Pain Disorder is pain that is the predominant focus of the clinical
presentation and is of sufficient severity to warrant clinical attention (Criterion A). The
pain causes significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning (Criterion B). Psychological factors are judged to play a significant
role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain (Criterion C). The
pain is not intentionally produced or feigned as in Factitious Disorder or Malingering
(Criterion D). Pain Disorder is not diagnosed if the pain is better accounted for by a
Mood, Anxiety, or Psychotic Disorder, or if the pain presentation meets criteria for
Dyspareunia (Criterion E). Examples of impairment resulting from the pain include
inability to work or attend school, frequent use of the health care system, the pain
becoming a major focus of the individual's life, substantial use of medications, and
relational problems such as marital discord and disruption of the family's normal lifestyle.
The psychological factors involved may consist of another Axis I or Axis II disorder
(which would also be diagnosed) or may be of a nature that does not reach the threshold
for such a disorder (e.g., reactions to psychosocial stressors).
Subtypes and Specifiers
Pain Disorder is coded according to the subtype that best characterizes the factors
involved in the etiology and maintenance of the pain:
307.80 Pain Disorder Associated With Psychological Factors. This sub-
type is used when psychological factors are judged to have the major role in the
onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain. In this subtype, general
medical conditions play either no role or a minimal role in the onset or
maintenance of the pain. This subtype is not diagnosed if criteria for Somatization
Disorder are met.
307.89 Pain Disorder Associated With Both Psychological Factors and a
General Medical Condition. This subtype is used when both psychological
factors and a general medical condition are judged to have important roles in the
onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain. The anatomical site of
the pain or associated general medical condition is coded on Axis III (see
"Recording Procedures").
Paul Disorder Associated With a General Medical Condition. This subtype
of Pain Disorder is not considered a mental disorder and is coded on Axis III. It
is listed in this section to facilitate differential diagnosis. The pain results from a
general medical condition, and psychological factors are judged to play either no
role or a minimal role in the onset or maintenance of the pain. The ICD-9-CM
code for this subtype is selected based on the location of the pain or the associated
general medical condition if this has been established (see "Recording Proce-
dures").
For Pain Disorder Associated With Psychological Factors and Pain Disorder Associ-
ated With Both Psychological Factors and a General Medical Condition, the following
specifiers may be noted to indicate the duration of the pain:Pain Disorder
459
Acute. This specifier is used if the duration of the pain is less than 6 months.
Chronic. This specifier is used if the duration of the pain is 6 months or longer.
Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for Pain Disorder is selected based on the subtype described above.
The code is 307.80 for Pain Disorder Associated With Psychological Factors. For Pain
Disorder Associated With Both Psychological Factors and a General Medical Condition,
307.89 is coded on Axis I and the associated general medical condition or anatomical
site of pain is coded on Axis III (e.g., 307.89 Pain Disorder Associated With Both
Psychological Factors and a General Medical Condition on Axis I; 357.2 Diabetic
Polyneuropathy on Axis III). For Pain Disorder Associated With a General Medical
Condition, the diagnostic code for the pain is selected based on the associated general
medical condition if one has been established (see Appendix G) or on the anatomical
location of the pain if the underlying general medical condition is not yet clearly
established—for example, low back (724.2), sciatic (724.3), pelvic (625.9), headache
(784.0), facial (784.0), chest (786.50), joint (719.4), bone (733.90), abdominal (789.0),
breast (611.71), renal (788.0), ear (388.70), eye (379-9D, throat (784.1), tooth (525.9),
and urinary (788.0).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Pain may severely disrupt
various aspects of daily life. Unemployment, disability, and family problems are
frequently encountered among individuals with chronic forms of Pain Disorder. latro-
genic Opioid Dependence or Abuse and Benzodiazepine Dependence or Abuse may
develop. Individuals whose pain is associated with severe depression and those whose
pain is related to a terminal illness, most notably cancer, appear to be at increased risk
for suicide. Individuals with recurrent acute or chronic pain are sometimes convinced
that there is a health professional somewhere who has the "cure" for the pain. They may
spend a considerable amount of time and money seeking an unattainable goal. Pain
may lead to inactivity and social isolation, which in turn can lead to additional
psychological problems (e.g., depression) and a reduction in physical endurance that
results in fatigue and additional pain. Pain Disorder appears to be associated with other
mental disorders, especially Mood and Anxiety Disorders. Chronic pain appears to be
most frequently associated with Depressive Disorders, whereas acute pain appears to
be more commonly associated with Anxiety Disorders. The associated mental disorders
may precede the Pain Disorder (and possibly predispose the individual to it), co-occur
with it, or result from it. Both the acute and chronic forms of Pain Disorder are frequently
associated with insomnia.
Associated laboratory findings. In Pain Disorder Associated With Both Psycholog-
ical Factors and a General Medical Condition, appropriate laboratory testing may reveal
pathology that is associated with the pain (e.g., finding of a herniated lumbar disc on a
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan in an individual with radicular low-back pain).
However, general medical conditions may also be present in the absence of objective
findings. Conversely, the presence of such findings may be coincidental to the pain.460
Somatoform Disorders
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions. In
Pain Disorder Associated With Both Psychological Factors and a General Medical
Condition, the physical examination may reveal pathology that is associated with the
pain. Pain Disorder can be associated with many general medical conditions. Among
the most common general medical conditions associated with pain are various muscu-
loskeletal conditions (e.g., disc herniation, osteoporosis, osteoarthritis or rheumatoid
arthritis, myofascial syndromes), neuropathies (e.g., diabetic neuropathies, post-herpetic
neuralgia), and malignancies (e.g., metastatic lesions in bone, tumor infiltration of
nerves). Attempts to treat the pain may lead to additional problems, some of which can
cause more pain (e.g., use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs resulting in gastro-
intestinal distress, surgery resulting in adhesions).
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
There may be differences in how various ethnic and cultural groups respond to painful
stimuli and how they express their reactions to pain. However, because there is so much
individual variation, these factors are of limited usefulness in the evaluation and
management of individuals with Pain Disorder.
Pain Disorder may occur at any age. Females appear to experience certain chronic
pain conditions, most notably headaches and musculoskeletal pain, more often than do
males.
Prevalence
Pain Disorder appears to be relatively common. For example, it is estimated that, in any
given year, 10%-15% of adults in the United States have some form of work disability
due to back pain alone.
Course
Most acute pain resolves in relatively short periods of time. There is a wide range of
variability in the onset of chronic pain. In most cases, the symptom has persisted for
many years by the time the individual comes to the attention of the mental health
profession. Important factors that appear to influence recovery from Pain Disorder are
the individual's participation in regularly scheduled activities (e.g., work) despite the
pain and resistance to allowing the pain to become the determining factor in his or her
lifestyle.
Familial Pattern
Depressive Disorders, Alcohol Dependence, and chronic pain may be more common in
the first-degree biological relatives of individuals with chronic Pain Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
Pain symptoms are included in the diagnostic criteria for Somatization Disorder. If the
pain associated with psychological factors occurs exclusively during the course of
Somatization Disorder, an additional diagnosis of Pain Disorder Associated WithPain Disorder
461
Psychological Factors is not made. Similarly, if the pain presentation meets criteria for
Dyspareunia (i.e., pain associated with sexual intercourse), an additional diagnosis of
Pain Disorder is not given. Pain complaints may be prominent in individuals with
Conversion Disorder, but by definition, Conversion Disorder is not limited to pain
symptoms. Pain symptoms are common associated features of other mental disorders
(e.g., Depressive Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, Psychotic Disorders). An additional
diagnosis of Pain Disorder should be considered only if the pain is an independent focus
of clinical attention, leads to clinically significant distress or impairment, and is in excess
of that usually associated with the other mental disorder.
Pain symptoms may be intentionally produced or feigned in Factitious Disorder
or Malingering. In Factitious Disorder, the motivation is to assume the sick role and to
obtain medical evaluation and treatment, whereas more obvious goals such as financial
compensation, avoidance of duties related to military service or incarceration, evasion
of criminal prosecution, or obtaining drugs are apparent in Malingering.
Relationship to the Taxonomy Proposed by
The International Association for the Study of Pain
The Subcommittee on Taxonomy of The International Association for the Study of Pain
proposed a five-axis system for categorizing chronic pain according to I) anatomical
region, II) organ system, III) temporal characteristics of pain and pattern of occurrence,
IV) patient's statement of intensity and time since onset of pain, and V) etiology. This
five-axis system focuses primarily on the physical manifestations of pain. It provides for
comments on psychological factors on both the second axis where the involvement of
a mental disorder can be coded and the fifth axis where possible etiologies include
"psychophysiological" and "psychological."
Diagnostic criteria for Pain Disorder
A. Pain in one or more anatomical sites is the predominant focus of the
clinical presentation and is of sufficient severity to warrant clinical
attention.
B. The pain causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. Psychological factors are judged to have an important role in the onset,
severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain.
D. The symptom or deficit is not intentionally produced or feigned (as in
Factitious Disorder or Malingering).
E. The pain is not better accounted for by a Mood, Anxiety, or Psychotic
Disorder and does not meet criteria for Dyspareunia.
(continued)462
Somatoform Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Pain Disorder (continued)
Code as follows:
307.80 Pain Disorder Associated With Psychological Factors: psy-
chological factors are judged to have the major role in the onset, severity,
exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain. (If a general medical condition
is present, it does not have a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation,
or maintenance of the pain.) This type of Pain Disorder is not diagnosed if
criteria are also met for Somatization Disorder.
Specify if:
Acute: duration of less than 6 months
Chronic: duration of 6 months or longer
307.89 Pain Disorder Associated With Both Psychological Factors
and a General Medical Condition: both psychological factors and a
general medical condition are judged to have important roles in the onset,
severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain. The associated general
medical condition or anatomical site of the pain (see below) is coded on
Axis III.
Specify if:
Acute: duration of less than 6 months
Chronic: duration of 6 months or longer
Note: The following is not considered to be a mental disorder and is included
here to facilitate differential diagnosis.
Pain Disorder Associated With a General Medical Condition: a general
medical condition has a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or
maintenance of the pain. (If psychological factors are present, they are not judged
to have a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the
pain.) The diagnostic code for the pain is selected based on the associated general
medical condition if one has been established (see Appendix G) or on the
anatomical location of the pain if the underlying general medical condition is not
yet clearly established—for example, low back (724.2), sciatic (724.3), pelvic
(625.9), headache (784.0), facial (784.0), chest (786.50), joint (719.4), bone (733.90),
abdominal (789.0), breast (611.71), renal (788.0), ear (388.70), eye (379.91), throat
(784.1), tooth (525.9), and urinary (788.0).
300.7 Hypochondriasis
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Hypochondriasis is preoccupation with fears of having, or the
idea that one has, a serious disease based on a misinterpretation of one or more bodily
signs or symptoms (Criterion A). A thorough medical evaluation does not identify a
general medical condition that fully accounts for the person's concerns about disease or
for the physical signs or symptoms (although a coexisting general medical condition300.7 Hypochondriasis
463
may be present). The unwarranted fear or idea of having a disease persists despite
medical reassurance (Criterion B). However, the belief is not of delusional intensity (i.e.,
the person can acknowledge the possibility that he or she may be exaggerating the
extent of the feared disease, or that there may be no disease at all). The belief is also
not restricted to a circumscribed concern about appearance, as seen in Body Dysmorphic
Disorder (Criterion C). The preoccupation with bodily symptoms causes clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning (Criterion D) and lasts for at least 6 months (Criterion E). The preoccupation
is not better accounted for by Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder, Panic Disorder, a Major Depressive Episode, Separation Anxiety, or another
Somatoform Disorder (Criterion F).
The preoccupation in Hypochondriasis may be with bodily functions (e.g., heartbeat,
sweating, or peristalsis); with minor physical abnormalities (e.g., a small sore or an
occasional cough); or with vague and ambiguous physical sensations (e.g., "tired heart,"
"aching veins"). The person attributes these symptoms or signs to the suspected disease
and is very concerned with their meaning, authenticity, and etiology. The concerns may
involve several body systems, at different times or simultaneously. Alternatively, there
may be preoccupation with a specific organ or a single disease (e.g., fear of having
cardiac disease). Repeated physical examinations, diagnostic tests, and reassurance from
the physician do little to allay the concern about bodily disease or affliction. For example,
an individual preoccupied with having cardiac disease will not be reassured by the
repeated lack of findings on physical examination, ECG, or even cardiac angiography.
Individuals with Hypochondriasis may become alarmed by reading or hearing about
disease, knowing someone who becomes sick, or from observations, sensations, or
occurrences within their own bodies. Concern about the feared illness often becomes
a central feature of the individual's self-image, a topic of social discourse, and a response
to life stresses.
Specifier
With Poor Insight. This specifier is used if, for most of the time during the
current episode, the individual does not recognize that the concern about having
a serious illness is excessive or unreasonable.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. The medical history is
often presented in great detail and at length in Hypochondriasis. "Doctor-shopping" and
deterioration in doctor-patient relationships, with frustration and anger on both sides,
are common. Individuals with this disorder often believe that they are not getting proper
care and may strenuously resist referral to mental health settings. Complications may
result from repeated diagnostic procedures that carry their own risks and are costly.
However, because these individuals have a history of multiple complaints without a
clear physical basis, they may receive cursory evaluations and the presence of a general
medical condition may be missed. Social relationships become strained because the
individual with Hypochondriasis is preoccupied with his or her condition and often
expects special treatment and consideration. Family life may become disturbed as it
becomes centered around the individual's physical well-being. There may be no effect464
Somatoform Disorders
on functioning at work if the individual limits the hypochondriacal preoccupation to
nonwork time. More often, the preoccupation interferes with performance and causes
the person to miss time from work. In more severe cases, the individual with
Hypochondriasis may become a complete invalid.
Serious illnesses, particularly in childhood, and past experience with disease in a
family member are associated with the occurrence of Hypochondriasis. Psychosocial
stressors, in particular the death of someone close to the individual, are thought to
precipitate Hypochondriasis in some cases. Individuals with Hypochondriasis often have
other mental disorders (particularly Anxiety and Depressive Disorders).
Associated laboratory findings.
preoccupation.
Laboratory findings do not confirm the individual's
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Physical examination findings do not confirm the individual's preoccupation.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Whether it is unreasonable for the preoccupation with disease to persist despite
appropriate medical evaluation and reassurance must be judged relative to the
individual's cultural background and explanatory models. The diagnosis of Hypochon-
driasis should be made cautiously if the individual's ideas about disease have been
reinforced by traditional healers who may disagree with the reassurances provided by
medical evaluations. The disorder is equally common in males and in females.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Hypochondriasis in the general population is unknown. The
prevalence in general medical practice has been reported to be between 4% and 9%.
Course
Hypochondriasis can begin at any age, with the most common age at onset thought to
be in early adulthood. The course is usually chronic, with waxing and waning symptoms,
but complete recovery sometimes occurs. It appears that acute onset, general medical
comorbidity, the absence of a Personality Disorder, and the absence of secondary gain
are favorable prognostic indicators. Because of its chronicity, some view this disorder
as having prominent "traitlike" characteristics (i.e., a long-standing preoccupation with
bodily complaints and focus on bodily symptoms).
Differential Diagnosis
The most important differential diagnostic consideration in Hypochondriasis is an
underlying general medical condition, such as the early stages of neurological
conditions (e.g., multiple sclerosis or myasthenia gravis), endocrine conditions (e.g.,
thyroid or parathyroid disease), diseases that affect multiple body systems (e.g., systemic
lupus erythematosus), and occult malignancies. Although the presence of a general
medical condition does not rule out the possibility of coexisting Hypochondriasis,
transient preoccupations related to a current general medical condition do not constitute300.7 Hypochondriasis
465
Hypochondriasis. Somatic symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain) are common in children
and should not be diagnosed as Hypochondriasis unless the child has a prolonged
preoccupation with having a serious illness. Bodily preoccupations and fears of debility
may be frequent in elderly persons. However, the onset of health concerns in old age
is more likely to be realistic or to reflect a Mood Disorder rather than Hypochondriasis.
Hypochondriasis is diagnosed only when the individual's health concerns are not
better accounted for by Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder, Panic Disorder, a Major Depressive Episode, Separation Anxiety
Disorder, or another Somatoform Disorder. Individuals with Hypochondriasis may
have intrusive thoughts about having a disease and also may have associated compulsive
behaviors (e.g., asking for reassurances). A separate diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder is given only when the obsessions or compulsions are not restricted to concerns
about illness (e.g., checking locks). In Body Dysmorphic Disorder, the concern is
limited to the person's physical appearance. In contrast to a Specific ("disease") Phobia
in which the individual is fearful of being exposed to a disease, Hypochondriasis is
characterized by a preoccupation that one has the disease.
In Hypochondriasis, the disease conviction does not reach delusional proportions
(i.e., the individual can entertain the possibility that the feared disease is not present),
as opposed to somatic delusions that can occur in Psychotic Disorders (e.g.,
Schizophrenia, Delusional Disorder, Somatic Type, and Major Depressive Disorder, With
Psychotic Features).
I Diagnostic criteria for 300.7 Hypochondriasis
A. Preoccupation with fears of having, or the idea that one has, a serious
disease based on the person's misinterpretation of bodily symptoms.
B. The preoccupation persists despite appropriate medical evaluation and
reassurance.
C. The belief in Criterion A is not of delusional intensity (as in Delusional
Disorder, Somatic Type) and is not restricted to a circumscribed concern
about appearance (as in Body Dysmorphic Disorder).
D. The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The duration of the disturbance is at least 6 months.
F. The preoccupation is not better accounted for by Generalized Anxiety
Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Panic Disorder, a Major
Depressive Episode, Separation Anxiety, or another Somatoform Disorder.
Specify if:
With Poor Insight: if, for most of the time during the current episode,
the person does not recognize that the concern about having a serious
illness is excessive or unreasonable466
Somatoform Disorders
300.7 Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Body Dysmorphic Disorder (historically known as dys-
morphophobia) is a preoccupation with a defect in appearance (Criterion A). The defect
is either imagined, or, if a slight physical anomaly is present, the individual's concern is
markedly excessive (Criterion A). The preoccupation must cause significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
B). The preoccupation is not better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g.,
dissatisfaction with body shape and size in Anorexia Nervosa) (Criterion C).
Complaints commonly involve imagined or slight flaws of the face or head such as
hair thinning, acne, wrinkles, scars, vascular markings, paleness or redness of the
complexion, swelling, facial asymmetry or disproportion, or excessive facial hair. Other
common preoccupations include the shape, size, or some other aspect of the nose, eyes,
eyelids, eyebrows, ears, mouth, lips, teeth, jaw, chin, cheeks, or head. However, any
other body part may be the focus of concern (e.g., the genitals, breasts, buttocks,
abdomen, arms, hands, feet, legs, hips, shoulders, spine, larger body regions, or overall
body size). The preoccupation may simultaneously focus on several body parts. Although
the complaint is often specific (e.g., a "crooked" lip or a "bumpy" nose), it is sometimes
vague (e.g., a "falling" face or "inadequately firm" eyes). Because of embarrassment over
their concerns, some individuals with Body Dysmorphic Disorder avoid describing their
"defects" in detail and may instead refer only to their general ugliness.
Most individuals with this disorder experience marked distress over their supposed
deformity, often describing their preoccupations as "intensely painful," "tormenting," or
"devastating." Most find their preoccupations difficult to control, and they may make
little or no attempt to resist them. As a result, they often spend hours a day thinking
about their "defect," to the point where these thoughts may dominate their lives.
Significant impairment in many areas of functioning generally occurs. Feelings of
self-consciousness about their "defect" may lead to avoidance of work or public
situations.
Associated Features and Disorders
Frequent mirror checking and checking of the "defect" in other available reflecting
surfaces (e.g., store windows, car bumpers, watch faces) can consume many hours a
day. Some individuals use special lighting or magnifying glasses to scrutinize their
"defect." There may be excessive grooming behavior (e.g., excessive hair combing, hair
removal, ritualized makeup application, or skin picking). Although the checking and
grooming are intended by some individuals to diminish anxiety about the "defect," they
often intensify the preoccupation and associated anxiety. Consequently, some individ-
uals avoid mirrors, sometimes covering them or removing them from their environment.
Others appear to alternate between periods of excessive mirror checking and avoidance.
There may be frequent requests for reassurance about the "defect," but such reassurance
leads to only temporary, if any, relief. Individuals with the disorder may also frequently
compare their "ugly" body part with that of others. Ideas of reference related to the
imagined defect are also common. Individuals with this disorder often think that others
may be (or are) taking special notice of their supposed flaw, perhaps talking about it
or mocking it. They may try to camouflage the "defect" (e.g., growing a beard to cover300.7 Body Dysmorphic Disorder
467
imagined facial scars, wearing a hat to hide imagined hair loss, stuffing their shorts to
enhance a "small" penis). Some individuals may be excessively preoccupied with fears
that the "ugly" body part will malfunction or is extremely fragile and in constant danger
of being damaged.
Avoidance of usual activities may lead to extreme social isolation. In some cases,
individuals may leave their homes only at night, when they cannot be seen, or become
housebound, sometimes for years. Individuals with this disorder may drop out of school,
avoid job interviews, work at jobs below their capacity, or not work at all. They may
have few friends, avoid dating and other social interactions, have marital difficulties, or
get divorced because of their symptoms. The distress and dysfunction associated with
this disorder, although variable, can lead to repeated hospitalization and to suicidal
ideation, suicide attempts, and completed suicide. Individuals with Body Dysmorphic
Disorder often pursue and receive general medical, dental, or surgical treatments to
rectify their imagined defects. Such treatment may cause the disorder to worsen, leading
to intensified or new preoccupations, which may in turn lead to further unsuccessful
procedures, so that individuals may eventually possess "synthetic" noses, ears, breasts,
and hips, which they are still dissatisfied with. Body Dysmorphic Disorder may be
associated with Major Depressive Disorder, Delusional Disorder, Social Phobia, and
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Cultural concerns about physical appearance and the importance of proper physical
self-presentation may influence or amplify preoccupations about an imagined physical
deformity. Preliminary evidence suggests that Body Dysmorphic Disorder is diagnosed
with approximately equal frequency in women and in men.
Prevalence
Reliable information is lacking, but Body Dysmorphic Disorder may be more common
than was previously thought.
Course
Body Dysmorphic Disorder usually begins during adolescence, but may not be
diagnosed for many years, often because individuals with the disorder are reluctant to
reveal their symptoms. The onset may be either gradual or abrupt. The disorder often
has a fairly continuous course, with few symptom-free intervals, although the intensity
of symptoms may wax and wane over time. The part of the body on which concern is
focused may remain the same or may change.
Differential
Diagnosis
Unlike normal concerns about appearance, the preoccupation with appearance in
Body Dysmorphic Disorder is excessively time consuming and associated with significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning. However,
Body Dysmorphic Disorder may be underrecognized in settings in which cosmetic
procedures are performed.
The diagnosis of Body Dysmorphic Disorder should not be made if the preoccupa-468
Somatoform Disorders
tion is better accounted for by another mental disorder. Body Dysmorphic Disorder
should not be diagnosed if the excessive preoccupation is restricted to concerns about
"fatness" in Anorexia Nervosa, if the individual's preoccupation is limited to discomfort
with or a sense of inappropriateness about his or her primary and secondary sex
characteristics occurring in Gender Identity Disorder, or if the preoccupation is limited
to mood-congruent ruminations involving appearance that occur exclusively during a
Major Depressive Episode. Individuals with Avoidant Personality Disorder or
Social Phobia may worry about being embarrassed by real defects in appearance, but
this concern is usually not prominent, persistent, distressing, time consuming, and
impairing. Although individuals with Body Dysmorphic Disorder have obsessional
preoccupations about their appearance and may have associated compulsive behaviors
(e.g., mirror checking), a separate diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is
given only when the obsessions or compulsions are not restricted to concerns about
appearance.
Individuals with Body Dysmorphic Disorder can receive an additional diagnosis of
Delusional Disorder, Somatic Type, if their preoccupation with an imagined defect
in appearance is held with a delusional intensity.
Koro is a culture-bound syndrome that occurs primarily in Southeast Asia that may
be related to Body Dysmorphic Disorder. It is characterized by the preoccupation that
the penis is shrinking and will disappear into the abdomen, resulting in death. Koro
differs from Body Dysmorphic Disorder by its usually brief duration, different associated
features (primarily acute anxiety and fear of death), positive response to reassurance,
and occasional occurrence as an epidemic.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.7 Body Dysmorphic
Disorder
A. Preoccupation with an imagined defect in appearance. If a slight
physical anomaly is present, the person's concern is markedly excessive.
B. The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The preoccupation is not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (e.g., dissatisfaction with body shape and size in Anorexia
Nervosa).
300.81 Somatoform Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category includes disorders with somatoform symptoms that do not meet the criteria
for any specific Somatoform Disorder. Examples include
1. Pseudocyesis: a false belief of being pregnant that is associated with objective
signs of pregnancy, which may include abdominal enlargement (although the300.81 Somatoform Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
469
umbilicus does not become everted), reduced menstrual flow, amenorrhea,
subjective sensation of fetal movement, nausea, breast engorgement and secre-
tions, and labor pains at the expected date of delivery. Endocrine changes may
be present, but the syndrome cannot be explained by a general medical condition
that causes endocrine changes (e.g., a hormone-secreting tumor).
2. A disorder involving nonpsychotic hypochondriacal symptoms of less than
6 months' duration.
3. A disorder involving unexplained physical complaints (e.g., fatigue or body
weakness) of less than 6 months' duration that are not due to another mental
disorder.This page intentionally left blankFactitious Disorders
F
actitious Disorders are characterized by physical or psychological symptoms that
are intentionally produced or feigned in order to assume the sick role. The judgment
that a particular symptom is intentionally produced is made both by direct evidence and
by excluding other causes of the symptom. For example, an individual presenting with
hematuria is found to have anticoagulants in his possession. The person denies having
taken them, but blood studies are consistent with the ingestion of anticoagulants.
A reasonable inference, in the absence of evidence that accidental ingestion occurred,
is that the individual may have taken the medication intentionally. It should be noted
that the presence of factitious symptoms does not preclude the coexistence of true
physical or psychological symptoms.
Factitious Disorders are distinguished from acts of Malingering. In Malingering, the
individual also produces the symptoms intentionally, but has a goal that is obviously
recognizable when the environmental circumstances are known. For example, the
intentional production of symptoms to avoid jury duty, standing trial, or conscription
into the military would be classified as Malingering. Similarly, if an individual who is
hospitalized for treatment of a mental disorder simulates an exacerbation of illness to
avoid transfer to another, less desirable facility, this would be an act of Malingering. In
contrast, in Factitious Disorder, the motivation is a psychological need to assume the
sick role, as evidenced by an absence of external incentives for the behavior. Malingering
may be considered to be adaptive under certain circumstances (e.g., in hostage
situations), but by definition a diagnosis of a Factitious Disorder always implies
psychopathology.
Factitious Disorder
The essential feature of Factitious Disorder is the intentional production of physical or
psychological signs or symptoms (Criterion A). The presentation may include fabrication
of subjective complaints (e.g., complaints of acute abdominal pain in the absence of any
such pain), self-inflicted conditions (e.g., the production of abscesses by injection of
saliva into the skin), exaggeration or exacerbation of preexisting general medical
conditions (e.g., feigning of a grand mal seizure by an individual with a previous history
of seizure disorder), or any combination or variation of these. The motivation for the
behavior is to assume the sick role (Criterion B). External incentives for the behavior
471472
Factitious Disorders
(e.g., economic gain, avoiding legal responsibility, or improving physical well-being, as
in Malingering) are absent (Criterion C).
Individuals with Factitious Disorder usually present their history with dramatic flair,
but are extremely vague and inconsistent when questioned in greater detail. They may
engage in pathological lying, in a manner that is intriguing to the listener, about any
aspect of their history or symptoms (i.e., pseudologia fantastica). They often have
extensive knowledge of medical terminology and hospital routines. Complaints of pain
and requests for analgesics are very common. After an extensive workup of their initial
chief complaints has proved negative, they often complain of other physical or
psychological problems and produce more factitious symptoms. Individuals with this
disorder may eagerly undergo multiple invasive procedures and operations. While in
the hospital, they usually have few visitors. Eventually, a point may be reached at which
the factitious nature of the individual's symptoms is revealed (e.g., the person is
recognized by someone who encountered the patient during a previous admission; other
hospitals confirm multiple prior hospitalizations for factitious symptomatology). When
confronted with evidence that their symptoms are factitious, individuals with this disorder
usually deny the allegations or rapidly discharge themselves against medical advice.
Frequently, they will be admitted to another hospital soon after. Their repeated
hospitalizations often take them to numerous cities, states, and countries.
Subtypes
Factitious Disorder is coded according to the subtype that best characterizes the
predominant symptoms.
300.16 With Predominantly Psychological Signs and Symptoms. This
subtype describes a clinical presentation in which psychological signs and
symptoms predominate. It is characterized by the intentional production or
feigning of psychological (often psychotic) symptoms that are suggestive of a
mental disorder. The individual's goal is apparently to assume the "patient" role
and is not otherwise understandable in light of environmental circumstances (in
contrast to the case in Malingering). This subtype may be suggested by a
wide-ranging symptomatology that often does not correspond to a typical
syndromal pattern, an unusual course and response to treatment, and the
worsening of symptoms when the individual is aware of being observed.
Individuals with this subtype of Factitious Disorder may claim depression and
suicidal ideation following the death of a spouse (the death not being confirmed
by other informants), memory loss (recent and remote), hallucinations (auditory
and visual), and dissociative symptoms. These individuals may be extremely
suggestible and may endorse many of the symptoms brought up during a review
of systems. Conversely, they may be extremely negativistic and uncooperative
when questioned. The presentation usually represents the individual's concept
of mental disorder and may not conform to any recognized diagnostic category.
300.19 With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symptoms. This subtype
describes a clinical presentation in which signs and symptoms of an apparent
general medical condition predominate. The individual's entire life may consist
of trying to get admitted to, or stay in, hospitals (known as "Munchausen
syndrome"). Common clinical pictures include severe right-lower-quadrant pain
associated with nausea and vomiting, dizziness and blacking out, massiveFactitious Disorder
473
hemoptysis, generalized rashes and abscesses, fevers of undetermined origin,
bleeding secondary to ingestion of anticoagulants, and "lupus-like" syndromes.
All organ systems are potential targets, and the symptoms presented are limited
only by the individual's medical knowledge, sophistication, and imagination.
300.19 With Combined Psychological and Physical Signs and Symptoms.
This subtype describes a clinical presentation in which both psychological and
physical signs and symptoms are present, but neither predominates.
Associated Features and Disorders
In Factitious Disorder With Predominantly Psychological Signs and Symptoms, the giving
of approximate answers may occur (e.g., 8 times 8 equals 65). The individual may
surreptitiously use psychoactive substances for the purpose of producing symptoms that
suggest a mental disorder (e.g., stimulants to produce restlessness or insomnia, halluci-
nogens to induce altered perceptual states, analgesics to induce euphoria, and hypnotics
to induce lethargy). Combinations of psychoactive substances can produce very unusual
presentations.
Individuals with Factitious Disorder With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symp-
toms may also present with Substance Abuse, particularly of prescribed analgesics and
sedatives. Multiple hospitalizations frequently lead to iatrogenically induced general
medical conditions (e.g., the formation of scar tissue from unnecessary surgery, or
adverse drug reactions). Individuals with the chronic form of this disorder may acquire
a "gridiron abdomen" from multiple surgical procedures. Factitious Disorder is usually
incompatible with the individual's maintaining steady employment, family ties, and
interpersonal relationships. Possible predisposing factors to Factitious Disorder may
include the presence of other mental disorders or general medical conditions during
childhood or adolescence that led to extensive medical treatment and hospitalization; a
grudge against the medical profession; employment in a medically related position; the
presence of a severe Personality Disorder; and an important relationship with a physician
in the past.
Prevalence
There is limited information on prevalence of Factitious Disorder. Although it is a rarely
reported diagnosis, it often may not be recognized. On the other hand, the chronic form
of the disorder may be overreported because affected individuals appear to different
physicians at different hospitals, often under different names. The disorder is apparently
more common in males than in females.
Course
The course of Factitious Disorder may be limited to one or more brief episodes, but is
usually chronic. The onset is usually in early adulthood, often after a hospitalization for
a general medical condition or other mental disorder. In the chronic form of this disorder,
a pattern of successive hospitalizations may become a lifelong pattern.474
Factitious Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
A Factitious Disorder must be distinguished from a true general medical condition
and from a true mental disorder. Suspicion that an apparent mental disorder or general
medical condition in fact represents Factitious Disorder should be aroused if any
combination of the following is noted in a hospitalized individual: an atypical or dramatic
presentation that does not conform to an identifiable general medical condition or mental
disorder; symptoms or behaviors that are present only when the individual is being
observed; pseudologia fantastica; disruptive behavior on the ward (e.g., noncompliance
with hospital regulations, arguing excessively with nurses and physicians); extensive
knowledge of medical terminology and hospital routines; covert use of substances;
evidence of multiple treatment interventions (e.g., repeated surgery, repeated courses
of electroconvulsive therapy); extensive history of traveling; few, if any, visitors while
hospitalized; and a fluctuating clinical course, with rapid development of "complications"
or new "pathology" once the initial workup proves to be negative.
In Somatoform Disorders, physical complaints that are not fully attributable to a
true general medical condition are also present, but the symptoms are not intentionally
produced. Malingering differs from Factitious Disorder in that the motivation for the
symptom production in Malingering is an external incentive, whereas in Factitious
Disorder external incentives are absent. Individuals with Malingering may seek hospi-
talization by producing symptoms in attempts to obtain compensation, evade the police,
or simply "get a bed for the night." However, the goal is usually apparent, and they can
"stop" the symptoms when the symptoms are no longer useful to them.
• Diagnostic criteria for Factitious Disorder
A. Intentional production or feigning of physical or psychological signs or
symptoms.
B. The motivation for the behavior is to assume the sick role.
C. External incentives for the behavior (such as economic gain, avoiding
legal responsibility, or improving physical well-being, as in Malingering)
are absent.
Code based on type:
300.16 With Predominantly Psychological Signs and Symptoms:
if psychological signs and symptoms predominate in the clinical
presentation
300.19 With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symptoms: if
physical signs and symptoms predominate in the clinical presentation
300.19 With Combined Psychological and Physical Signs and
Symptoms: if both psychological and physical signs and symptoms are
present but neither predominates in the clinical presentation300.19 Factitious Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
475
300.19 Factitious Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category includes disorders with factitious symptoms that do not meet the criteria
for Factitious Disorder. An example is factitious disorder by proxy: the intentional
production or feigning of physical or psychological signs or symptoms in another person
who is under the individual's care for the purpose of indirectly assuming the sick role
(see p. 725 for suggested research criteria).Dissociative Disorders
T
he essential feature of the Dissociative Disorders is a disruption in the usually
integrated functions of consciousness, memory, identity, or perception of the
environment. The disturbance may be sudden or gradual, transient or chronic. The
following disorders are included in this section:
Dissociative Amnesia is characterized by an inability to recall important personal
information, usually of a traumatic or stressful nature, that is too extensive to be explained
by ordinary forgetfulness.
Dissociative Fugue is characterized by sudden, unexpected travel away from home
or one's customary place of work, accompanied by an inability to recall one's past and
confusion about personal identity or the assumption of a new identity.
Dissociative Identity Disorder (formerly Multiple Personality Disorder) is charac-
terized by the presence of two or more distinct identities or personality states that
recurrently take control of the individual's behavior accompanied by an inability to recall
important personal information that is too extensive to be explained by ordinary
forgetfulness.
Depersonalization Disorder is characterized by a persistent or recurrent feeling
of being detached from one's mental processes or body that is accompanied by intact
reality testing.
Dissociative Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding disorders
in which the predominant feature is a dissociative symptom, but that do not meet the
criteria for any specific Dissociative Disorder.
Dissociative symptoms are also included in the criteria sets for Acute Stress Disorder,
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Somatization Disorder. An additional Dissociative
Disorder diagnosis is not given if the dissociative symptoms occur exclusively during
the course of one of these disorders. In some classifications, conversion reaction is
considered to be a dissociative phenomenon; however, in DSM-IV, Conversion Disorder
is placed in the "Somatoform Disorders" section to emphasize the importance of
considering neurological or other general medical conditions in the differential diagnosis.
A cross-cultural perspective is particularly important in the evaluation of Dissociative
Disorders because dissociative states are a common and accepted expression of cultural
activities or religious experience in many societies. Dissociation should not be consid-
ered inherently pathological and often does not lead to significant distress, impairment,
or help-seeking behavior. However, a number of culturally defined syndromes charac-
terized by dissociation do cause distress and impairment and are recognized indige-
nously as manifestations of pathology (see p. 727 and p. 843).
477478
Dissociative Disorders
300.12 Dissociative Amnesia
(formerly Psychogenic Amnesia)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Dissociative Amnesia is an inability to recall important personal
information, usually of a traumatic or stressful nature, that is too extensive to be explained
by normal forgetfulness (Criterion A). This disorder involves a reversible memory
impairment in which memories of personal experience cannot be retrieved in a verbal
form (or, if temporarily retrieved, cannot be wholly retained in consciousness). The
disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of Dissociative Identity
Disorder, Dissociative Fugue, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, Acute Stress Disorder, or
Somatization Disorder and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance
or a neurological or other general medical condition (Criterion B). The symptoms must
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion C).
Dissociative Amnesia most commonly presents as a retrospectively reported gap or
series of gaps in recall for aspects of the individual's life history. These gaps are usually
related to traumatic or extremely stressful events. Some individuals may have amnesia
for episodes of self-mutilation, violent outbursts, or suicide attempts. Less commonly,
Dissociative Amnesia presents as a florid episode with sudden onset. This acute form is
more likely to occur during wartime or in response to a natural disaster.
Several types of memory disturbances have been described in Dissociative Amnesia.
In localized amnesia, the individual fails to recall events that occurred during a
circumscribed period of time, usually the first few hours following a profoundly
disturbing event (e.g., the uninjured survivor of a car accident in which a family member
has been killed may not be able to recall anything that happened from the time of the
accident until 2 days later). In selective amnesia, the person can recall some, but not all,
of the events during a circumscribed period of time (e.g., a combat veteran can recall
only some parts of a series of violent combat experiences). Three other types of
amnesia—generalized, continuous, and systematized—are less common. In generalized
amnesia, failure of recall encompasses the person's entire life. Individuals with this rare
disorder usually present to the police, to emergency rooms, or to general hospital
consultation-liaison services. Continuous amnesia is defined as the inability to recall
events subsequent to a specific time up to and including the present. Systematized
amnesia is loss of memory for certain categories of information, such as all memories
relating to one's family or to a particular person. Individuals who exhibit these latter
three types of Dissociative Amnesia may ultimately be diagnosed as having a more
complex form of Dissociative Disorder (e.g., Dissociative Identity Disorder).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders.
Some individuals with
Dissociative Amnesia report depressive symptoms, depersonalization, trance states,
analgesia, and spontaneous age regression. They may provide approximate inaccurate
answers to questions (e.g., "2 plus 2 equals 5") as in Ganser syndrome. Other problems
that sometimes accompany this disorder include sexual dysfunction, impairment in work
and interpersonal relationships, self-mutilation, aggressive impulses, and suicidal im-300.12 Dissociative Amnesia
479
pulses and acts. Individuals with Dissociative Amnesia may also have symptoms that
meet criteria for Conversion Disorder, a Mood Disorder, or a Personality Disorder.
Associated laboratory findings. Individuals with Dissociative Amnesia often dis-
play high hypnotizability as measured by standardized testing.
Specific Age Features
Dissociative Amnesia is especially difficult to assess in preadolescent children, because
it may be confused with inattention, anxiety, oppositional behavior, Learning Disorders,
psychotic disturbances, and developmentally appropriate childhood amnesia (i.e., the
decreased recall of autobiographical events that occurred before age 5). Serial observa-
tion or evaluations by several different examiners (e.g., teacher, therapist, case worker)
may be needed to make an accurate diagnosis of Dissociative Amnesia in children.
Prevalence
In recent years in the United States, there has been an increase in reported cases of
Dissociative Amnesia that involves previously forgotten early childhood traumas. This
increase has been subject to very different interpretations. Some believe that the greater
awareness of the diagnosis among mental health professionals has resulted in the
identification of cases that were previously undiagnosed. In contrast, others believe that
the syndrome has been overdiagnosed in individuals who are highly suggestible.
Course
Dissociative Amnesia can present in any age group, from young children to adults. The
main manifestation in most individuals is a retrospective gap in memory. The reported
duration of the events for which there is amnesia may be minutes to years. Only a single
episode of amnesia may be reported, although two or more episodes are also commonly
described. Individuals who have had one episode of Dissociative Amnesia may be
predisposed to develop amnesia for subsequent traumatic circumstances. Acute amnesia
may resolve spontaneously after the individual is removed from the traumatic circum-
stances with which the amnesia was associated (e.g., a soldier with localized amnesia
after several days of intense combat may spontaneously regain memory of these
experiences after being removed from the battlefield). Some individuals with chronic
amnesia may gradually begin to recall dissociated memories. Other individuals may
develop a chronic form of amnesia.
Differential
Diagnosis
Dissociative Amnesia must be distinguished from Amnestic Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition, in which the amnesia is judged to be the direct physiological
consequence of a specific neurological or other general medical condition (e.g., head
trauma, epilepsy) (see p. 158). This determination is based on history, laboratory
findings, or physical examination. In Amnestic Disorder Due to a Brain Injury, the
disturbance of recall, though circumscribed, is often retrograde, encompassing a period
of time before the head trauma, and there is usually a history of a clear-cut physical480
Dissociative Disorders
trauma, a period of unconsciousness, or clinical evidence of brain injury. In contrast, in
Dissociative Amnesia, the disturbance of recall is almost always anterograde (i.e.,
memory loss is restricted to the period after the trauma). The rare case of Dissociative
Amnesia with retrograde amnesia can be distinguished by the diagnostic use of hypnosis;
the prompt recovery of the lost memories suggests a dissociative basis for the
disturbance. In seizure disorders, the memory impairment is sudden in onset, motor
abnormalities may be present, and repeated EEGs reveal typical abnormalities. In
delirium and dementia, the memory loss for personal information is embedded in a
far more extensive set of cognitive, linguistic, affective, attentional, perceptual, and
behavioral disturbances. In contrast, in Dissociative Amnesia, the memory loss is
primarily for autobiographical information and cognitive abilities generally are pre-
served. The amnesia associated with a general medical condition usually cannot be
reversed.
Memory loss associated with the use of substances or medications must be
distinguished from Dissociative Amnesia. Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic
Disorder should be diagnosed if it is judged that there is a persistent loss of memory
that is related to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or
a medication) (see p. l6l). Whereas the ability to lay down new memories is preserved
in Dissociative Amnesia, in Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder, short-term
memory is impaired (i.e., events may be recalled immediately after they occur, but not
after a few minutes have passed). Memory loss associated with Substance Intoxication
(e.g., "blackouts") can be distinguished from Dissociative Amnesia by the association of
the memory loss with heavy substance use and the fact that the amnesia usually cannot
be reversed.
The dissociative symptom of amnesia is a characteristic feature of both Dissociative
Fugue and Dissociative Identity Disorder. Therefore, if the dissociative amnesia occurs
exclusively during the course of Dissociative Fugue or Dissociative Identity Disor-
der, a separate diagnosis of Dissociative Amnesia is not made. Because depersonaliza-
tion is an associated feature of Dissociative Amnesia, depersonalization that occurs only
during Dissociative Amnesia should not be diagnosed separately as Depersonalization
Disorder.
In Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Acute Stress Disorder, there can be
amnesia for the traumatic event. Similarly, dissociative symptoms such as amnesia are
included in the criteria set for Somatization Disorder. Dissociative Amnesia is not
diagnosed if it occurs exclusively during the course of these disorders.
There are no tests or set of procedures that invariably distinguish Dissociative
Amnesia from Malingering, but individuals with Dissociative Amnesia usually score
high on standard measures of hypnotizability and dissociative capacity. Malingered
amnesia is more common in individuals presenting with acute, florid symptoms in a
context in which potential secondary gain is evident—for example, financial or legal
problems or the desire to avoid combat, although true amnesia may also be associated
with such stressors.
Care must be exercised in evaluating the accuracy of retrieved memories, because
the informants are often highly suggestible. There has been considerable controversy
concerning amnesia related to reported physical or sexual abuse, particularly when abuse
is alleged to have occurred during early childhood. Some clinicians believe that there
has been an underreporting of such events, especially because the victims are often
children and perpetrators are inclined to deny or distort their actions. However, other
clinicians are concerned that there may be overreporting, particularly given the300.13 Dissociative Fugue
481
unreliability of childhood memories. There is currently no method for establishing with
certainty the accuracy of such retrieved memories in the absence of corroborative
evidence.
Dissociative Amnesia must also be differentiated from memory loss related to
Age-Related Cognitive Decline and nonpathological forms of amnesia including
everyday memory loss, posthypnotic amnesia, infantile and childhood amnesia, and
amnesia for sleep and dreaming. Dissociative Amnesia can be distinguished from normal
gaps in memory by the intermittent and involuntary nature of the inability to recall and
by the presence of significant distress or impairment.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.12 Dissociative Amnesia
A. The predominant disturbance is one or more episodes of inability to
recall important personal information, usually of a traumatic or stressful
nature, that is too extensive to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness.
B. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of
Dissociative Identity Disorder, Dissociative Fugue, Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder, Acute Stress Disorder, or Somatization Disorder and is not due
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or a neurological or other general medical condition (e.g.,
Amnestic Disorder Due to Head Trauma).
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
300.13 Dissociative Fugue
(formerly Psychogenic Fugue)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Dissociative Fugue is sudden, unexpected, travel away from
home or one's customary place of daily activities, with inability to recall some or all of
one's past (Criterion A). This is accompanied by confusion about personal identity or
even the assumption of a new identity (Criterion B). The disturbance does not occur
exclusively during the course of Dissociative Identity Disorder and is not due to the
direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition (Criterion C).
The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion D).
Travel may range from brief trips over relatively short periods of time (i.e., hours
or days) to complex, usually unobtrusive wandering over long time periods (e.g., weeks
or months), with some individuals reportedly crossing numerous national borders and
traveling thousands of miles. During a fugue, individuals generally appear to be without482
Dissociative Disorders
psychopathology and do not attract attention. At some point, the individual is brought
to clinical attention, usually because of amnesia for recent events or a lack of awareness
of personal identity. Once the individual returns to the prefugue state, there may be no
memory for the events that occurred during the fugue.
Most fugues do not involve the formation of a new identity. If a new identity is
assumed during a fugue, it is usually characterized by more gregarious and uninhibited
traits than characterized the former identity. The person may assume a new name, take
up a new residence, and engage in complex social activities that are well integrated and
that do not suggest the presence of a mental disorder.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. After return to the pre-
fugue state, amnesia for traumatic events in the person's past may be noted (e.g., after
termination of a long fugue, a soldier remains amnestic for wartime events that occurred
several years previously in which the soldier's closest friend was killed). Depression,
dysphoria, grief, shame, guilt, psychological stress, conflict, and suicidal and aggressive
impulses may be present. The person may provide approximate inaccurate answers to
questions (e.g., "2 plus 2 equals 5") as in Ganser syndrome. The extent and duration of
the fugue may determine the degree of other problems, such as loss of employment or
severe disruption of personal or family relationships. Individuals with Dissociative Fugue
may have a Mood Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, or a Substance-Related
Disorder.
Specific Culture Features
Individuals with various culturally defined "running" syndromes (e.g., pibloktoq among
native peoples of the Arctic, grisi siknis among the Miskito of Honduras and Nicaragua,
Navajo "frenzy" witchcraft, and some forms of amok in Western Pacific cultures) may
have symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for Dissociative Fugue. These are conditions
characterized by a sudden onset of a high level of activity, a trancelike state, potentially
dangerous behavior in the form of running or fleeing, and ensuing exhaustion, sleep,
and amnesia for the episode. (See also Dissociative Trance Disorder in Appendix B,
p. 727.)
Prevalence
A prevalence rate of 0.2% for Dissociative Fugue has been reported in the general
population. The prevalence may increase during times of extremely stressful events such
as wartime or natural disaster.
Course
The onset of Dissociative Fugue is usually related to traumatic, stressful, or overwhelming
life events. Most cases are described in adults. Single episodes are most commonly
reported and may last from hours to months. Recovery is usually rapid, but refractory
Dissociative Amnesia may persist in some cases.300.13 Dissociative Fugue
Differential
483
Diagnosis
Dissociative Fugue must be distinguished from symptoms that are judged to be the direct
physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., head
injury) (see p. 165). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination. Individuals with complex partial seizures have been noted to
exhibit wandering or semipurposeful behavior during seizures or during postictal states
for which there is subsequent amnesia. However, an epileptic fugue can usually be
recognized because the individual may have an aura, motor abnormalities, stereotyped
behavior, perceptual alterations, a postictal state, and abnormal findings on serial EEGs.
Dissociative symptoms that are judged to be the direct physiological consequence of a
general medical condition should be diagnosed as Mental Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified Due to a General Medical Condition. Dissociative Fugue must also be
distinguished from symptoms caused by the direct physiological effects of a sub-
stance (see p. 192).
If the fugue symptoms only occur during the course of Dissociative Identity
Disorder, Dissociative Fugue should not be diagnosed separately. Dissociative Am-
nesia and Depersonalization Disorder should not be diagnosed separately if the
amnesia or depersonalization symptoms occur only during the course of a Dissociative
Fugue. Wandering and purposeful travel that occur during a Manic Episode must be
distinguished from Dissociative Fugue. As in Dissociative Fugue, individuals in a Manic
Episode may report amnesia for some period of their life, particularly for behavior that
occurs during euthymic or depressed states. However, in a Manic Episode, the travel is
associated with grandiose ideas and other manic symptoms and such individuals often
call attention to themselves by inappropriate behavior. Assumption of an alternate
identity does not occur.
Peripatetic behavior may also occur in Schizophrenia. Memory for events during
wandering episodes in individuals with Schizophrenia may be difficult to ascertain due
to the individual's disorganized speech. However, individuals with Dissociative Fugue
generally do not demonstrate any of the psychopathology associated with Schizophrenia
(e.g., delusions, negative symptoms).
Individuals "with Dissociative Fugue usually score high on standard measures of
hypnotizability and dissociative capacity. However, there are no tests or set of procedures
that invariably distinguish true dissociative symptoms from those that are malingered.
Malingering of fugue states may occur in individuals who are attempting to flee a
situation involving legal, financial, or personal difficulties, as well as in soldiers who are
attempting to avoid combat or unpleasant military duties (although true Dissociative
Fugue may also be associated with such stressors). Malingering of dissociative symptoms
can be maintained even during hypnotic or barbiturate-facilitated interviews. In the
forensic context, the examiner should always give careful consideration to the diagnosis
of malingering when fugue is claimed. Criminal conduct that is bizarre or with little
actual gain may be more consistent with a true dissociative disturbance.484
Dissociative Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for 300.13 Dissociative Fugue
A. The predominant disturbance is sudden, unexpected travel away from
home or one's customary place of work, with inability to recall one's
past.
B. Confusion about personal identity or assumption of a new identity
(partial or complete).
C. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of
Dissociative Identity Disorder and is not due to the direct physiological
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general
medical condition (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy).
D. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
300.14 Dissociative Identity Disorder
(formerly Multiple Personality Disorder)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Dissociative Identity Disorder is the presence of two or more
distinct identities or personality states (Criterion A) that recurrently take control of
behavior (Criterion B). There is an inability to recall important personal information, the
extent of which is too great to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness (Criterion C). The
disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general
medical condition (Criterion D). In children, the symptoms cannot be attributed to
imaginary playmates or other fantasy play.
Dissociative Identity Disorder reflects a failure to integrate various aspects of identity,
memory, and consciousness. Each personality state may be experienced as if it has a
distinct personal history, self-image, and identity, including a separate name. Usually
there is a primary identity that carries the individual's given name and is passive,
dependent, guilty, and depressed. The alternate identities frequently have different
names and characteristics that contrast with the primary identity (e.g., are hostile,
controlling, and self-destructive). Particular identities may emerge in specific circum-
stances and may differ in reported age and gender, vocabulary, general knowledge, or
predominant affect. Alternate identities are experienced as taking control in sequence,
one at the expense of the other, and may deny knowledge of one another, be critical
of one another, or appear to be in open conflict. Occasionally, one or more powerful
identities allocate time to the others. Aggressive or hostile identities may at times interrupt
activities or place the others in uncomfortable situations.
Individuals with this disorder experience frequent gaps in memory for personal
history, both remote and recent. The amnesia is frequently asymmetrical. The more
passive identities tend to have more constricted memories, whereas the more hostile,
controlling, or "protector" identities have more complete memories. An identity that is300.14 Dissociative Identity Disorder
485
not in control may nonetheless gain access to consciousness by producing auditory or
visual hallucinations (e.g., a voice giving instructions). Evidence of amnesia may be
uncovered by reports from others who have witnessed behavior that is disavowed by
the individual or by the individual's own discoveries (e.g., finding items of clothing at
home that the individual cannot remember having bought). There may be loss of memory
not only for recurrent periods of time, but also an overall loss of biographical memory
for some extended period of childhood. Transitions among identities are often triggered
by psychosocial stress. The time required to switch from one identity to another is usually
a matter of seconds, but, less frequently, may be gradual. The number of identities
reported ranges from 2 to more than 100. Half of reported cases include individuals with
10 or fewer identities.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with Dissocia-
tive Identity Disorder frequently report having experienced severe physical and sexual
abuse, especially during childhood. Controversy surrounds the accuracy of such reports,
because childhood memories may be subject to distortion and individuals with this
disorder tend to be highly hypnotizable and especially vulnerable to suggestive
influences. On the other hand, those responsible for acts of physical and sexual abuse
may be prone to deny or distort their behavior. Individuals with Dissociative Identity
Disorder may manifest posttraumatic symptoms (e.g., nightmares, flashbacks, and startle
responses) or Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Self-mutilation and suicidal and aggressive
behavior may occur. Some individuals may have a repetitive pattern of relationships
involving physical and sexual abuse. Certain identities may experience conversion
symptoms (e.g., pseudoseizures) or have unusual abilities to control pain or other
physical symptoms. Individuals with this disorder may also have symptoms that meet
criteria for Mood, Substance-Related, Sexual, Eating, or Sleep Disorders. Self-mutilative
behavior, impulsivity, and sudden and intense changes in relationships may warrant a
concurrent diagnosis of Borderline Personality Disorder.
Associated laboratory findings. Individuals with Dissociative Identity Disorder
score toward the upper end of the distribution on measures of hypnotizability and
dissociative capacity. There are reports of variation in physiological function across
identity states (e.g., differences in visual acuity, pain tolerance, symptoms of asthma,
sensitivity to allergens, and response of blood glucose to insulin).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
There may be scars from self-inflicted injuries or physical abuse. Individuals with this
disorder may have migraine and other types of headaches, irritable bowel syndrome,
and asthma.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
It has been suggested that the recent relatively high rates of the disorder reported in the
United States might indicate that this is a culture-specific syndrome. In preadolescent
children, particular care is needed in making the diagnosis because the manifestations
may be less distinctive than in adolescents and adults. Dissociative Identity Disorder is486
Dissociative Disorders
diagnosed three to nine times more frequently in adult females than in adult males; in
childhood, the female-to-male ratio may be more even, but data are limited. Females
tend to have more identities than do males, averaging 15 or more, whereas males average
approximately 8 identities.
Prevalence
The sharp rise in reported cases of Dissociative Identity Disorder in the United States
in recent years has been subject to very different interpretations. Some believe that
the greater awareness of the diagnosis among mental health professionals has
resulted in the identification of cases that were previously undiagnosed. In contrast,
others believe that the syndrome has been overdiagnosed in individuals who are
highly suggestible.
Course
Dissociative Identity Disorder appears to have a fluctuating clinical course that tends to
be chronic and recurrent. The average time period from first symptom presentation to
diagnosis is 6-7 years. Episodic and continuous courses have both been described. The
disorder may become less manifest as individuals age beyond their late 40s, but may
reemerge during episodes of stress or trauma or with Substance Abuse.
Familial Pattern
Several studies suggest that Dissociative Identity Disorder is more common among the
first-degree biological relatives of persons with the disorder than in the general
population.
Differential Diagnosis
Dissociative Identity Disorder must be distinguished from symptoms that are caused
by the direct physiological effects of a general medical condition (e.g., seizure
disorder) (see p. 165). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination. Dissociative Identity Disorder should be distinguished from
dissociative symptoms due to complex partial seizures, although the two disorders
may co-occur. Seizure episodes are generally brief (30 seconds to 5 minutes) and do
not involve the complex and enduring structures of identity and behavior typically found
in Dissociative Identity Disorder. Also, a history of physical and sexual abuse is less
common in individuals with complex partial seizures. EEG studies, especially sleep
deprived and with nasopharyngeal leads, may help clarify the differential diagnosis.
Symptoms caused by the direct physiological effects of a substance can be
distinguished from Dissociative Identity Disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse or a medication) is judged to be etiologically related to the disturbance
(see p. 192).
The diagnosis of Dissociative Identity Disorder takes precedence over Dissociative
Amnesia, Dissociative Fugue, and Depersonalization Disorder. Individuals with
Dissociative Identity Disorder can be distinguished from those with trance and posses-
sion trance symptoms that would be diagnosed as Dissociative Disorder Not Other-300.14 Dissociative Identity Disorder
487
wise Specified by the fact that those with trance and possession trance symptoms
typically describe external spirits or entities that have entered their bodies and taken
control.
Controversy exists concerning the differential diagnosis between Dissociative Iden-
tity Disorder and a variety of other mental disorders, including Schizophrenia and
other Psychotic Disorders, Bipolar Disorder, With Rapid Cycling, Anxiety
Disorders, Somatization Disorders, and Personality Disorders. Some clinicians
believe that Dissociative Identity Disorder has been underdiagnosed (e.g., the presence
of more than one dissociated personality state may be mistaken for a delusion or the
communication from one identity to another may be mistaken for an auditory halluci-
nation, leading to confusion with the Psychotic Disorders; shifts between identity states
may be confused with cyclical mood fluctuations leading to confusion with Bipolar
Disorder). In contrast, others are concerned that Dissociative Identity Disorder may be
overdiagnosed relative to other mental disorders based on the media interest in the
disorder and the suggestible nature of the individuals. Factors that may support a
diagnosis of Dissociative Identity Disorder are the presence of clear-cut dissociative
symptomatology with sudden shifts in identity states, reversible amnesia, and high scores
on measures of dissociation and hypnotizability in individuals who do not have the
characteristic presentations of another mental disorder.
Dissociative Identity Disorder must be distinguished from Malingering in situations
in which there may be financial or forensic gain and from Factitious Disorder in which
there may be a pattern of help-seeking behavior.
Diagnostic criteria for 300.14 Dissociative Identity
Disorder
A. The presence of two or more distinct identities or personality states (each
with its own relatively enduring pattern of perceiving, relating to, and
thinking about the environment and self).
B. At least two of these identities or personality states recurrently take
control of the person's behavior.
C. Inability to recall important personal information that is too extensive
to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness.
D. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., blackouts or chaotic behavior during Alcohol Intoxica-
tion) or a general medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Note: In children, the symptoms are not attributable to imaginary
playmates or other fantasy play.488
Dissociative Disorders
300.6 Depersonalizetion Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Depersonalization Disorder are persistent or recurrent episodes
of depersonalization characterized by a feeling of detachment or estrangement from
one's self (Criterion A). The individual may feel like an automaton or as if he or she is
living in a dream or a movie. There may be a sensation of being an outside observer of
one's mental processes, one's body, or parts of one's body. Various types of sensory
anesthesia, lack of affective response, and a sensation of lacking control of one's actions,
including speech, are often present. The individual with Depersonalization Disorder
maintains intact reality testing (e.g., awareness that it is only a feeling and that he or she
is not really an automaton) (Criterion B). Depersonalization is a common experience,
and this diagnosis should be made only if the symptoms are sufficiently severe to cause
marked distress or impairment in functioning (Criterion C). Because depersonalization
is a common associated feature of many other mental disorders, a separate diagnosis of
Depersonalization Disorder is not made if the experience occurs exclusively during the
course of another mental disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia, Panic Disorder, Acute Stress
Disorder, or another Dissociative Disorder). In addition, the disturbance is not due to
the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition (Criterion D).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Often individuals with
Depersonalization Disorder may have difficulty describing their symptoms and may fear
that these experiences signify that they are "crazy." Derealization may also be present
and is experienced as the sense that the external world is strange or unreal. The individual
may perceive an uncanny alteration in the size or shape of objects (macropsia or
micropsia), and people may seem unfamiliar or mechanical. Other common associated
features include anxiety symptoms, depressive symptoms, obsessive rumination, somatic
concerns, and a disturbance in one's sense of time. In some cases, the loss of feeling
that is characteristic of depersonalization may mimic Major Depressive Disorder and, in
other cases, may coexist with it. Hypochondriasis and Substance-Related Disorders may
also coexist with Depersonalization Disorder. Depersonalization and derealization are
very frequent symptoms of Panic Attacks. A separate diagnosis of Depersonalization
Disorder should not be made when the depersonalization and derealization occur
exclusively during such attacks.
Associated laboratory findings. Individuals with Depersonalization Disorder may
display high hypnotizability and high dissociative capacity as measured by standardized
testing.
Specific Culture Features
Voluntarily induced experiences of depersonalization or derealization form part of
meditative and trance practices that are prevalent in many religions and cultures and
should not be confused with Depersonalization Disorder.300.6 Depersonalization Disorder
489
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of Depersonalization Disorder in community and clinical settings
is unknown. At some time in their lives, approximately half of all adults may have
experienced a single brief episode of depersonalization, usually precipitated by severe
stress. A transient experience of depersonalization develops in nearly one-third of
individuals exposed to life-threatening danger and in close to 40% of patients hospital-
ized for mental disorders.
Course
Individuals with Depersonalization Disorder usually present for treatment in adolescence
or adulthood, although the disorder may have an undetected onset in childhood.
Because depersonalization is rarely the presenting complaint, individuals with recurrent
depersonalization often present with another symptom such as anxiety, panic, or
depression. Duration of episodes of depersonalization can vary from very brief (seconds)
to persistent (years). Depersonalization subsequent to life-threatening situations (e.g.,
military combat, traumatic accidents, being a victim of violent crime) usually develops
suddenly on exposure to the trauma. The course may be chronic and marked by
remissions and exacerbations. Most often the exacerbations occur in association with
actual or perceived stressful events.
Differential Diagnosis
Depersonalization Disorder must be distinguished from symptoms that are due to the
physiological consequences of a specific general medical condition (e.g., epi-
lepsy) (see p. 165). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination. Depersonalization that is caused by the direct physiological
effects of a substance is distinguished from Depersonalization Disorder by the fact that
a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a medication) is judged to be etiologically related
to the depersonalization (see p. 192). Acute Intoxication or Withdrawal from alcohol
and a variety of other substances can result in depersonalization. On the other hand,
substance use may intensify the symptoms of a preexisting Depersonalization Disorder.
Thus, accurate diagnosis of Depersonalization Disorder in individuals with a history of
alcohol- or substance-induced depersonalization should include a longitudinal history
of Substance Abuse and depersonalization symptoms.
Depersonalization Disorder should not be diagnosed separately when the symptoms
occur only during a Panic Attack that is part of Panic Disorder, Social or Specific
Phobia, or Posttraumatic or Acute Stress Disorders. In contrast to Schizophrenia,
intact reality testing is maintained in Depersonalization Disorder. The loss of feeling
associated with depersonalization (e.g., numbness) may mimic a depression. However,
the absence of feeling in individuals with Depersonalization Disorder is associated with
other manifestations of depersonalization (e.g., a sense of detachment from one's self)
and occurs even when the individual is not depressed.490
Dissociative Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for 300.6 Depersonalization
Disorder
A. Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached from, and as if
one is an outside observer of, one's mental processes or body (e.g.,
feeling like one is in a dream).
B. During the depersonalization experience, reality testing remains intact.
C. The depersonalization causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The depersonalization experience does not occur exclusively during the
course of another mental disorder, such as Schizophrenia, Panic Disor-
der, Acute Stress Disorder, or another Dissociative Disorder, and is not
due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of
abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition (e.g., temporal lobe
epilepsy).
300.15 Dissociative Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is included for disorders in which the predominant feature is a dissociative
symptom (i.e., a disruption in the usually integrated functions of consciousness, memory,
identity, or perception of the environment) that does not meet the criteria for any specific
Dissociative Disorder. Examples include
1. Clinical presentations similar to Dissociative Identity Disorder that fail to meet
full criteria for this disorder. Examples include presentations in which a) there
are not two or more distinct personality states, or b) amnesia for important
personal information does not occur.
2. Derealization unaccompanied by depersonalization in adults.
3. States of dissociation that occur in individuals who have been subjected to
periods of prolonged and intense coercive persuasion (e.g., brainwashing,
thought reform, or indoctrination while captive).
4. Dissociative trance disorder: single or episodic disturbances in the state of
consciousness, identity, or memory that are indigenous to particular locations
and cultures. Dissociative trance involves narrowing of awareness of immediate
surroundings or stereotyped behaviors or movements that are experienced as
being beyond one's control. Possession trance involves replacement of the
customary sense of personal identity by a new identity, attributed to the influence
of a spirit, power, deity, or other person, and associated with stereotyped
"involuntary" movements or amnesia. Examples include amok (Indonesia),
bebainan (Indonesia), latah (Malaysia), pibloktoq (Arctic), ataque de nervios
(Latin America), and possession (India). The dissociative or trance disorder is300.15 Dissociative Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
491
not a normal part of a broadly accepted collective cultural or religious practice.
(See p. 727 for suggested research criteria.)
5. Loss of consciousness, stupor, or coma not attributable to a general medical
condition.
6. Ganser syndrome: the giving of approximate answers to questions (e.g., "2 plus 2
equals 5") when not associated with Dissociative Amnesia or Dissociative Fugue.This page intentionally left blankSexual and Gender
Identity Disorders
T
his section contains the Sexual Dysfunctions, the Paraphilias, and the Gender
Identity Disorders. The Sexual Dysfunctions are characterized by disturbance in
sexual desire and in the psychophysiological changes that characterize the sexual
response cycle and cause marked distress and interpersonal difficulty. The Sexual
Dysfunctions include Sexual Desire Disorders (i.e., Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder,
Sexual Aversion Disorder), Sexual Arousal Disorders (i.e., Female Sexual Arousal
Disorder, Male Erectile Disorder), Orgasmic Disorders (i.e., Female Orgasmic Disorder,
Male Orgasmic Disorder, Premature Ejaculation), Sexual Pain Disorders (i.e., Dyspareu-
nia, Vaginismus), Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition, Substance-
Induced Sexual Dysfunction, and Sexual Dysfunction Not Otherwise Specified.
The Paraphilias are characterized by recurrent, intense sexual urges, fantasies, or
behaviors that involve unusual objects, activities, or situations and cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning. The Paraphilias include Exhibitionism, Fetishism, Frotteurism, Pedophilia,
Sexual Masochism, Sexual Sadism, Transvestic Fetishism, Voyeurism, and Paraphilia Not
Otherwise Specified.
Gender Identity Disorders are characterized by strong and persistent cross-gender
identification accompanied by persistent discomfort with one's assigned sex.
Sexual Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding disorders of
sexual functioning that are not classifiable in any of the specific categories. It is important
to note that notions of deviance, standards of sexual performance, and concepts of
appropriate gender role can vary from culture to culture.
Sexual Dysfunctions
A Sexual Dysfunction is characterized by a disturbance in the processes that characterize
the sexual response cycle or by pain associated with sexual intercourse. The sexual
response cycle can be divided into the following phases:
1. Desire: This phase consists of fantasies about sexual activity and the desire to
have sexual activity.
493494
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
hHsubjective sense of sexual pleasure and
accompanying physiological changes. The major changes in the male consist of
penile tumescence and erection. The major changes in the female consist of
vasocongestion in the pelvis, vaginal lubrication and expansion, and swelling of
the external genitalia.
3. Orgasm: This phase consists of a peaking of sexual pleasure, with release of
sexual tension and rhythmic contraction of the perineal muscles and reproductive
organs. In the male, there is the sensation of ejaculatory inevitability, which is
followed by ejaculation of semen. In the female, there are contractions (not
always subjectively experienced as such) of the wall of the outer third of the
vagina. In both genders, the anal sphincter rhythmically contracts.
4. Resolution: This phase consists of a sense of muscular relaxation and general
well-being. During this phase, males are physiologically refractory to further
erection and orgasm for a variable period of time. In contrast, females may be
able to respond to additional stimulation almost immediately.
Disorders of sexual response may occur at one or more of these phases. Whenever
more than one Sexual Dysfunction is present, all are recorded. No attempt is made in
the criteria sets to specify a minimum frequency or range of settings, activities, or types
of sexual encounters in which the dysfunction must occur. This judgment must be made
by the clinician, taking into account such factors as the age and experience of the
individual, frequency and chronicity of the symptom, subjective distress, and effect on
other areas of functioning. The words "persistent or recurrent" in the diagnostic criteria
indicate the need for such a clinical judgment. If sexual stimulation is inadequate in
either focus, intensity, or duration, the diagnosis of Sexual Dysfunction involving
excitement or orgasm is not made.
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate the onset, context, and etiological factors associated
with the Sexual Dysfunctions. If multiple Sexual Dysfunctions are present, the appro-
priate subtypes for each may be noted. These subtypes do not apply to a diagnosis of
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition or Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction.
One of the following subtypes may be used to indicate the nature of the onset of
the Sexual Dysfunction:
Lifelong Type. This subtype applies if the sexual dysfunction has been present
since the onset of sexual functioning.
Acquired Type. This subtype applies if the sexual dysfunction develops only
after a period of normal functioning.
One of the following subtypes may be used to indicate the context in which the
Sexual Dysfunction occurs:
Generalized Type. This subtype applies if the sexual dysfunction is not limited
to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational Type. This subtype applies if the sexual dysfunction is limited to
certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners. Although in most instancesSexual Dysfunctions
495
the dysfunctions occur during sexual activity with a partner, in some cases it may
be appropriate to identify dysfunctions that occur during masturbation.
One of the following subtypes may be used to indicate etiological factors associated
with the Sexual Dysfunction:
Due to Psychological Factors. This subtype applies when psychological
factors are judged to have the major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or
maintenance of the Sexual Dysfunction, and general medical conditions and
substances play no role in the etiology of the Sexual Dysfunction.
Due to Combined Factors. This subtype applies when 1) psychological factors
are judged to have a role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of
the Sexual Dysfunction; and 2) a general medical condition or substance use is
also judged to be contributory but is not sufficient to account for the Sexual
Dysfunction. If a general medical condition or substance use (including medica-
tion side effects) is sufficient to account for the Sexual Dysfunction, Sexual
Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition (p. 515) and/or Substance-
Induced Sexual Dysfunction (p. 519) is diagnosed.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Clinical judgments about the presence of a Sexual Dysfunction should take into account
the individual's ethnic, cultural, religious, and social background, which may influence
sexual desire, expectations, and attitudes about performance. For example, in some
societies, sexual desires on the part of the female are given less relevance (especially
when fertility is the primary concern). Aging may be associated with a lowering of sexual
interest and functioning (especially in males), but there are wide individual differences
in age effects.
Prevalence
There are very few systematic epidemiological data regarding the prevalence of the
various sexual dysfunctions, and these show extremely wide variability, probably
reflecting differences in assessment methods, definitions used, and characteristics of
sampled populations.
Differential Diagnosis
If the Sexual Dysfunction is judged to be caused exclusively by the physiological effects
of a specified general medical condition, the diagnosis is Sexual Dysfunction Due to
a General Medical Condition (p. 515). This determination is based on history,
laboratory findings, or physical examination. If the Sexual Dysfunction is judged to be
caused exclusively by the physiological effects of a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin
exposure, the diagnosis is Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction (see p. 519). The
clinician should inquire carefully about the nature and extent of substance use, including
medications. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of)
Substance Intoxication or after medication use may be especially indicative of a
Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, depending on the type or amount of the
substance used or the duration of use.
If the clinician has ascertained that the sexual dysfunction is due to both a general496
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., Sexual Dysfunction Due to
a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction) can be given.
A primary Sexual Dysfunction diagnosis with the subtype Due to Combined Factors
is made if a combination of psychological factors and either a general medical condition
or a substance is judged to have an etiological role, but no one etiology is sufficient to
account for the dysfunction. If the clinician cannot determine the etiological roles of
psychological factors, a general medical condition, and substance use, Sexual Dysfunc-
tion Not Otherwise Specified is diagnosed.
The diagnosis of a Sexual Dysfunction is also not made if the dysfunction is better
accounted for by another Axis I disorder (e.g., if diminished sexual desire occurs only
in the context of a Major Depressive Episode). However, if the disturbance in sexual
functioning antedates the Axis I disorder or is a focus of independent clinical attention,
an additional diagnosis of Sexual Dysfunction can also be made. Commonly, if one
Sexual Dysfunction is present (e.g., a Sexual Arousal Disorder), additional Sexual
Dysfunctions will also be present (e.g., Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder). In such
cases, all should be diagnosed. A Personality Disorder may coexist with a Sexual
Dysfunction. In such cases, the Sexual Dysfunction should be recorded on Axis I and
the Personality Disorder should be recorded on Axis II. If another clinical condition,
such as a Relational Problem, is associated with the disturbance in sexual functioning,
the Sexual Dysfunction should be diagnosed and the other clinical condition is also
noted on Axis I. Occasional problems with sexual desire, arousal, or orgasm that are not
persistent or recurrent or are not accompanied by marked distress or interpersonal
difficulty are not considered to be Sexual Dysfunctions.
Sexual Desire Disorders
302.71 Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder is a deficiency or absence
of sexual fantasies and desire for sexual activity (Criterion A). The disturbance must
cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion B). The dysfunction is not
better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) and
is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance (including
medications) or a general medical condition (Criterion C). Low sexual desire may be
global and encompass all forms of sexual expression or may be situational and limited
to one partner or to a specific sexual activity (e.g., intercourse but not masturbation).
There is little motivation to seek stimuli and diminished frustration when deprived of
the opportunity for sexual expression. The individual usually does not initiate sexual
activity or may only engage in it reluctantly when it is initiated by the partner. Although
the frequency of sexual experiences is usually low, pressure from the partner or
nonsexual needs (e.g., for physical comfort or intimacy) may increase the frequency of
sexual encounters. Because of a lack of normative age- or gender-related data on
frequency or degree of sexual desire, the diagnosis must rely on clinical judgment based
on the individual's characteristics, the interpersonal determinants, the life context, and
the cultural setting. The clinician may need to assess both partners when discrepancies
in sexual desire prompt the call for professional attention. Apparent "low desire" in one302.71 Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
497
partner may instead reflect an excessive need for sexual expression by the other partner.
Alternatively, both partners may have levels of desire within the normal range but at
different ends of the continuum.
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational) and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder. (See descriptions on
p. 494.)
Associated Features and Disorders
Low sexual interest is frequently associated with problems of sexual arousal or with
orgasm difficulties. The deficiency in sexual desire may be the primary dysfunction or
may be the consequence of emotional distress induced by disturbances in excitement
or orgasm. However, some individuals with low sexual desire retain the capacity for
adequate sexual excitement and orgasm in response to sexual stimulation. General
medical conditions may have a nonspecific deleterious effect on sexual desire due to
weakness, pain, problems with body image, or concerns about survival. Depressive
disorders are often associated with low sexual desire, and the onset of depression may
precede, co-occur with, or be the consequence of the deficient sexual desire. Individuals
with Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder may have difficulties developing stable sexual
relationships and may have marital dissatisfaction and disruption.
Course
The age at onset for individuals with Lifelong forms of Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
is puberty. More frequently, the disorder develops in adulthood, after a period of
adequate sexual interest, in association with psychological distress, stressful life events,
or interpersonal difficulties. The loss of sexual desire may be continuous or episodic,
depending on psychosocial or relationship factors. An episodic pattern of loss of sexual
desire occurs in some individuals in relation to problems with intimacy and commitment.
Differential
Diagnosis
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder must be distinguished from Sexual Dysfunction
Due to a General Medical Condition. The appropriate diagnosis would be Sexual
Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition when the dysfunction is judged to be
due exclusively to the physiological effects of a specified general medical condition (see
p. 515). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or physical exami-
nation. Certain general medical conditions such as neurological, hormonal, and meta-
bolic abnormalities may specifically impair the physiological substrates of sexual desire.
Abnormalities in total and bioavailable testosterone and prolactin may indicate hormonal
disorders responsible for loss of sexual desire. If both Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
and a general medical condition are present, but it is judged that the sexual dysfunction
is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of the general medical condition,
then Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder, Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.498
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
In contrast to Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder, a Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., antihypertensive medication, a drug of abuse) (see p. 519). If both
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder and substance use are present, but it is judged that
the sexual dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of the
substance use, then Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder, Due to Combined Factors, is
diagnosed. If the low sexual desire is judged to be due exclusively to the physiological
effects of both a general medical condition and substance use, both Sexual Dysfunction
Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction are
diagnosed.
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder may also occur in association with other Sexual
Dysfunctions (e.g., Male Erectile Dysfunction). If so, both should be noted. An additional
diagnosis of Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder is usually not made if the low sexual
desire is better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (e.g., Major Depressive
Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder). The additional
diagnosis may be appropriate when the low desire predates the Axis I disorder or is a
focus of independent clinical attention. Occasional problems with sexual desire that
are not persistent or recurrent or are not accompanied by marked distress or interpersonal
difficulty are not considered to be Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder.
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.71 Hypoactive Sexual
Desire Disorder
A. Persistently or recurrently deficient (or absent) sexual fantasies and
desire for sexual activity. The judgment of deficiency or absence is made
by the clinician, taking into account factors that affect sexual functioning,
such as age and the context of the person's life.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The sexual dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I
disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or a general medical condition.
Specify type:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors302.79 Sexual Aversion Disorder
499
302.79 Sexual Aversion Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Sexual Aversion Disorder is the aversion to and active avoidance
of genital sexual contact with a sexual partner (Criterion A). The disturbance must cause
marked distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion B). The dysfunction is not better
accounted for by another Axis I disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) (Criterion
C). The individual reports anxiety, fear, or disgust when confronted by a sexual
opportunity with a partner. The aversion to genital contact may be focused on a particular
aspect of sexual experience (e.g., genital secretions, vaginal penetration). Some individ-
uals experience generalized revulsion to all sexual stimuli, including kissing and
touching. The intensity of the individual's reaction when exposed to the aversive stimulus
may range from moderate anxiety and lack of pleasure to extreme psychological
distress.
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Sexual Aversion Disorder. (See descriptions on p. 494.)
Associated Features and Disorders
When confronted with a sexual situation, some individuals with severe Sexual Aversion
Disorder may experience Panic Attacks with extreme anxiety, feelings of terror, faintness,
nausea, palpitations, dizziness, and breathing difficulties. There may be markedly
impaired interpersonal relations (e.g., marital dissatisfaction). Individuals may avoid
sexual situations or potential sexual partners by covert strategies (e.g., going to sleep
early, traveling, neglecting personal appearance, using substances, and being over-
involved in work, social, or family activities).
Differential Diagnosis
Sexual Aversion Disorder may also occur in association with other Sexual Dysfunctions
(e.g., Dyspareunia). If so, both should be noted. An additional diagnosis of Sexual
Aversion Disorder is usually not made if the sexual aversion is better accounted for by
another Axis I disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder). The additional diagnosis may be made when
the aversion predates the Axis I disorder or is a focus of independent clinical attention.
Although sexual aversion may technically meet the criteria for Specific Phobia, this
additional diagnosis is not given. Occasional sexual aversion that is not persistent or
recurrent or is not accompanied by marked distress or interpersonal difficulty is not
considered to be a Sexual Aversion Disorder.500
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.79 Sexual Aversion Disorder
A. Persistent or recurrent extreme aversion to, and avoidance of, all (or
almost all) genital sexual contact with a sexual partner.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The sexual dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I
disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction).
Specify type.-
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors
Sexual Arousal Disorders
302.72 Female Sexual Arousal Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Female Sexual Arousal Disorder is a persistent or recurrent
inability to attain, or to maintain until completion of the sexual activity, an adequate
lubrication-swelling response of sexual excitement (Criterion A). The arousal response
consists of vasocongestion in the pelvis, vaginal lubrication and expansion, and swelling
of the external genitalia. The disturbance must cause marked distress or interpersonal
difficulty (Criterion B). The dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I
disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (including medications) or a general medical
condition (Criterion C).
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Female Sexual Arousal Disorder. (See descriptions on p. 494.)302.72 Female Sexual Arousal Disorder
501
Associated Features and Disorders
Limited evidence suggests that Female Sexual Arousal Disorder is often accompanied
by Sexual Desire Disorders and Female Orgasmic Disorder. The individual with Female
Sexual Arousal Disorder may have little or no subjective sense of sexual arousal. The
disorder may result in painful intercourse, sexual avoidance, and the disturbance of
marital or sexual relationships.
Differential
Diagnosis
Female Sexual Arousal Disorder must be distinguished from a Sexual Dysfunction Due
to a General Medical Condition. The appropriate diagnosis would be Sexual Dysfunc-
tion Due to a General Medical Condition when the dysfunction is judged to be due
exclusively to the physiological effects of a specified general medical condition (e.g.,
menopausal or postmenopausal reductions in estrogen levels, atrophic vaginitis, diabetes
mellitus, radiotherapy of the pelvis) (see p. 515). Reduced lubrication has also been
reported in association with lactation. This determination is based on history, laboratory
findings, or physical examination. If both Female Sexual Arousal Disorder and a general
medical condition are present but it is judged that the sexual dysfunction is not due
exclusively to the direct physiological consequences of the general medical condition,
then Female Sexual Arousal Disorder, Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.
In contrast to Female Sexual Arousal Disorder, a Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., reduced lubrication caused by antihypertensives or antihistamines) (see
p. 519). If both Female Sexual Arousal Disorder and substance use are present but it is
judged that the sexual dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct physiological
effects of the substance use, then Female Sexual Arousal Disorder, Due to Combined
Factors, is diagnosed.
If the arousal problems are judged to be due exclusively to the physiological effects
of both a general medical condition and substance use, both Sexual Dysfunction Due
to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction are diag-
nosed.
Female Sexual Arousal Disorder may also occur in association with other Sexual
Dysfunctions (e.g., Female Orgasmic Disorder). If so, both should be noted. An
additional diagnosis of Female Sexual Arousal Disorder is usually not made if the sexual
arousal problem is better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (e.g., Major
Depressive Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder).
The additional diagnosis may be made when the problem with sexual arousal predates
the Axis I disorder or is a focus of independent clinical attention. Occasional problems
with sexual arousal that are not persistent or recurrent or are not accompanied by
marked distress or interpersonal difficulty are not considered to be Female Sexual Arousal
Disorder. A diagnosis of Female Sexual Arousal Disorder is also not appropriate if the
problems in arousal are due to sexual stimulation that is not adequate in focus, intensity,
and duration.502
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.72 Female Sexual Arousal
Disorder
A. Persistent or recurrent inability to attain, or to maintain until completion
of the sexual activity, an adequate lubrication-swelling response of
sexual excitement.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The sexual dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I
disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or a general medical condition.
Specify type:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors
302.72 Male Erectile Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Male Erectile Disorder is a persistent or recurrent inability to
attain, or to maintain until completion of the sexual activity, an adequate erection
(Criterion A). The disturbance must cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty
(Criterion B). The dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I disorder
(except another Sexual Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively to the direct physiological
effects of a substance (including medications) or a general medical condition (Crite-
rion C).
There are different patterns of erectile dysfunction. Some individuals will report the
inability to obtain any erection from the outset of a sexual experience. Others will
complain of first experiencing an adequate erection and then losing tumescence when
attempting penetration. Still others will report that they have an erection that is
sufficiently firm for penetration but that they then lose tumescence before or during
thrusting. Some males may report being able to experience an erection only during
self-masturbation or on awakening. Masturbatory erections may be lost as well, but this
is not common.302.72 Male Erectile Disorder
503
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Male Erectile Disorder. (See descriptions on p. 494.)
Associated Features and Disorders
The erectile difficulties in Male Erectile Disorder are frequently associated with sexual
anxiety, fear of failure, concerns about sexual performance, and a decreased subjective
sense of sexual excitement and pleasure. Erectile dysfunction can disrupt existing marital
or sexual relationships and may be the cause of unconsummated marriages and infertility.
This disorder may be associated with Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder and Premature
Ejaculation. Individuals with Mood Disorders and Substance-Related Disorders often
report problems with sexual arousal.
Course
The various forms of Male Erectile Disorder follow different courses, and the age at onset
varies substantially. The few individuals who have never been able to experience an
erection of sufficient quality to complete sexual activity with a partner typically have a
chronic, lifelong disorder. Acquired cases may remit spontaneously 15%-30% of the
time. Situational cases may be dependent on a type of partner or the intensity or quality
of the relationship and are episodic and frequently recurrent.
Differential Diagnosis
Male Erectile Disorder must be distinguished from Sexual Dysfunction Due to a
General Medical Condition. The appropriate diagnosis would be Sexual Dysfunction
Due to a General Medical Condition when the dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively
to the physiological effects of a specified general medical condition (e.g., diabetes
mellitus, multiple sclerosis, renal failure, peripheral neuropathy, peripheral vascular
disease, spinal cord injury, injury of the autonomic nervous system by surgery or
radiation) (see p. 515). This determination is based on history (e.g., impaired erectile
functioning during masturbation), laboratory findings, or physical examination. Noctur-
nal penile tumescence studies can demonstrate whether erections occur during sleep
and may be helpful in differentiating primary erectile disorders from Male Erectile
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. Penile blood pressure, pulse-wave
assessments, or duplex ultrasound studies can indicate vasculogenic loss of erectile
functioning. Invasive procedures such as intracorporeal pharmacological testing or
angiography can assess the presence of arterial flow problems. Cavernosography can
evaluate venous competence. If both Male Erectile Disorder and a general medical
condition are present but it is judged that the erectile dysfunction is not due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of the general medical condition, then Male Erectile
Disorder, Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.
A Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction is distinguished from Male Erectile
Disorder by the fact that the sexual dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively to the
direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., antihypertensive medication, antidepres-504
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
sant medication, neuroleptic medication, a drug of abuse) (see p. 519). If both Male
Erectile Disorder and substance use are present but it is judged that the erectile
dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of the substance
use, then Male Erectile Disorder, Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.
If the arousal problems are judged to be due exclusively to the physiological effects
of both a general medical condition and substance use, both Sexual Dysfunction Due
to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction are diag-
nosed.
Male Erectile Disorder may also occur in association with other Sexual Dysfunctions
(e.g., Premature Ejaculation). If so, both should be noted. An additional diagnosis of
Male Erectile Disorder is usually not made if the erectile dysfunction is better accounted
for by another Axis I disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder). The additional diagnosis may be made when the erectile dysfunction predates
the Axis I disorder or is a focus of independent clinical attention. Occasional problems
with having erections that are not persistent or recurrent or are not accompanied by
marked distress or interpersonal difficulty are not considered to be Male Erectile
Disorder. A diagnosis of Male Erectile Disorder is also not appropriate if the erectile
dysfunction is due to sexual stimulation that is not adequate in focus, intensity, and
duration. Older males may require more stimulation or take longer to achieve a full
erection. These physiological changes should not be considered to be Male Erectile
Disorder.
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.72 Male Erectile Disorder
A. Persistent or recurrent inability to attain, or to maintain until completion
of the sexual activity, an adequate erection.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The erectile dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I
disorder (other than a Sexual Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or a general medical condition.
Specify type:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors302.73 Female Orgasmic Disorder
505
Orgasmic Disorders
302.73 Female Orgasmic Disorder
(formerly Inhibited Female Orgasm)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Female Orgasmic Disorder is a persistent or recurrent delay in,
or absence of, orgasm following a normal sexual excitement phase (Criterion A). Women
exhibit wide variability in the type or intensity of stimulation that triggers orgasm. The
diagnosis of Female Orgasmic Disorder should be based on the clinician's judgment that
the woman's orgasmic capacity is less than would be reasonable for her age, sexual
experience, and the adequacy of sexual stimulation she receives. The disturbance must
cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion B). The dysfunction is not
better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) and
is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance (including
medications) or a general medical condition (Criterion C).
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Female Orgasmic Disorder. (See descriptions on p. 494.)
Associated Features and Disorders
No association has been found between specific patterns of personality traits or
psychopathology and orgasmic dysfunction in females. Female Orgasmic Disorder may
affect body image, self-esteem, or relationship satisfaction. According to controlled
studies, orgasmic capacity is not correlated with vaginal size or pelvic muscle strength.
Although females with spinal cord lesions, removal of the vulva, or vaginal excision and
reconstruction have reported reaching orgasm, orgasmic dysfunction is commonly
reported in women with these conditions. In general, however, chronic general medical
conditions like diabetes or pelvic cancer are more likely to impair the arousal phase of
the sexual response, leaving orgasmic capacity relatively intact.
Course
Because orgasmic capacity in females increases with age, Female Orgasmic Disorder
may be more prevalent in younger women. Most female orgasmic disorders are lifelong
rather than acquired. Once a female learns how to reach orgasm, it is uncommon for
her to lose that capacity, unless poor sexual communication, relationship conflict, a
traumatic experience (e.g., rape), a Mood Disorder, or a general medical condition
intervenes. When orgasmic dysfunction occurs only in certain situations, difficulty with
sexual desire and arousal are often present in addition to the orgasmic disorder. Many
females increase their orgasmic capacity as they experience a wider variety of stimulation
and acquire more knowledge about their own bodies.506
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Female Orgasmic Disorder must be distinguished from a Sexual Dysfunction Due to
a General Medical Condition. The appropriate diagnosis would be Sexual Dysfunction
Due to a General Medical Condition when the dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively
to the physiological effects of a specified general medical condition (e.g., spinal cord
lesion) (see p. 515). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination. If both Female Orgasmic Disorder and a general medical condition
are present but it is judged that the sexual dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct
physiological effects of the general medical condition, then Female Orgasmic Disorder,
Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.
In contrast to Female Orgasmic Disorder, a Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunc-
tion is judged to be due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., antidepressants, benzodiazepines, neuroleptics, antihypertensives, opioids) (see
p. 519). If both Female Orgasmic Disorder and substance use are present but it is judged
that the sexual dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of
the substance use, then Female Orgasmic Disorder, Due to Combined Factors, is
diagnosed.
If the sexual dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively to the physiological effects
of both a general medical condition and substance use, both Sexual Dysfunction Due
to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction are
diagnosed.
Female Orgasmic Disorder may also occur in association with other Sexual
Dysfunctions (e.g., Female Sexual Arousal Disorder). If so, both should be noted. An
additional diagnosis of Female Orgasmic Disorder is usually not made if the orgasmic
difficulty is better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (e.g., Major Depressive
Disorder). This additional diagnosis may be made when the orgasmic difficulty predates
the Axis I disorder or is a focus of independent clinical attention. Occasional orgasmic
problems that are not persistent or recurrent or are not accompanied by marked distress
or interpersonal difficulty are not considered to be Female Orgasmic Disorder. A
diagnosis of Female Orgasmic Disorder is also not appropriate if the problems are due
to sexual stimulation that is not adequate in focus, intensity, and duration.
Diagnostic criteria for 302.73 Female Orgasmic
Disorder
A. Persistent or recurrent delay in, or absence of, orgasm following a
normal sexual excitement phase. Women exhibit wide variability in the
type or intensity of stimulation that triggers orgasm. The diagnosis of
Female Orgasmic Disorder should be based on the clinician's judgment
that the woman's orgasmic capacity is less than would be reasonable
for her age, sexual experience, and the adequacy of sexual stimulation
she receives.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
(continued)302.74 Male Orgasmic Disorder
507
D Diagnostic criteria for 302.73 Female Orgasmic Disorder
(continued)
C. The orgasmic dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I
disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or a general medical condition.
Specify type:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Typ e
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors
302.74 Male Orgasmic Disorder
(formerly Inhibited Male Orgasm)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Male Orgasmic Disorder is a persistent or recurrent delay in, or
absence of, orgasm following a normal sexual excitement phase. In judging whether the
orgasm is delayed, the clinician should take into account the person's age and whether
the stimulation is adequate in focus, intensity, and duration (Criterion A). The disturbance
must cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion B). The orgasmic
dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (except another Sexual
Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance
(including medications) or a general medical condition (Criterion C). In the most
common form of Male Orgasmic Disorder, a male cannot reach orgasm during
intercourse, although he can ejaculate from a partner's manual or oral stimulation. Some
males with Male Orgasmic Disorder can reach coital orgasm but only after very prolonged
and intense noncoital stimulation. Some can ejaculate only from masturbation. An even
smaller subgroup have experienced orgasm only at the moment of waking from an erotic
dream.
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Male Orgasmic Disorder. (See descriptions on p. 494.)508
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Many coitally inorgasmic males describe feeling aroused at the beginning of a sexual
encounter but that thrusting gradually becomes a chore rather than a pleasure. A pattern
of paraphiliac sexual arousal may be present. When a man has hidden his lack of coital
orgasms from his wife, the couple may present with infertility of unknown cause. The
disorder may result in the disturbance of existing marital or sexual relationships. Males
can usually reach orgasm even when vascular or neurological conditions interfere with
erectile rigidity. Both the sensation of orgasm and striated muscle contractions at orgasm
remain intact in males who lose their prostate and seminal vesicles with radical pelvic
cancer surgery. Orgasm also can occur in the absence of emission of semen (e.g., when
sympathetic ganglia are damaged by surgery or autonomic neuropathy).
Differential
Diagnosis
Male Orgasmic Disorder must be distinguished from a Sexual Dysfunction Due to a
General Medical Condition. The appropriate diagnosis would be Sexual Dysfunction
Due to a General Medical Condition when the dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively
to the physiological effects of a specified general medical condition (e.g., hyperpro-
lactinemia) (see p. 515). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination. Sensory threshold testing may demonstrate reduced sensation in
the skin on the penis that is due to a neurological condition (e.g., spinal cord injuries,
sensory neuropathies). If both Male Orgasmic Disorder and a general medical condition
are present but it is judged that the sexual dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct
physiological effects of the general medical condition, then Male Orgasmic Disorder,
Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.
In contrast to Male Orgasmic Disorder, a Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
is judged to be due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
alcohol, opioids, antihypertensives, antidepressants, neuroleptics) (see p. 519). If both
Male Orgasmic Disorder and substance use are present but it is judged that the sexual
dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of the substance
use, then Male Orgasmic Disorder, Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.
If the orgasmic dysfunction is judged to be due exclusively to the physiological
effects of both a general medical condition and substance use, both Sexual Dysfunction
Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction are
diagnosed.
Male Orgasmic Disorder may also occur in association with other Sexual Dysfunc-
tions (e.g., Male Erectile Disorder). If so, both should be noted. An additional diagnosis
of Male Orgasmic Disorder is usually not made if the orgasmic difficulty is better
accounted for by another Axis I disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder). An
additional diagnosis may be made when the orgasmic difficulty predates the Axis I
disorder or is a focus of independent clinical attention. Several types of Sexual
Dysfunction (e.g., ejaculation but without pleasurable orgasm, orgasm that occurs
without ejaculation of semen or with seepage of semen rather than propulsive
ejaculation) would be diagnosed as Sexual Dysfunction Not Otherwise Specified
rather than as Male Orgasmic Disorder.
Occasional orgasmic problems that are not persistent or recurrent or are not
accompanied by marked distress or interpersonal difficulty are not considered to be302.75 Premature Ejaculation
509
Male Orgasmic Disorder. As males age, they may require a longer period of stimulation
to achieve orgasm. The clinician must also ascertain that there has been sufficient
stimulation to attain orgasm.
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.74 Male Orgasmic Disorder
A. Persistent or recurrent delay in, or absence of, orgasm following a
normal sexual excitement phase during sexual activity that the clinician,
taking into account the person's age, judges to be adequate in focus,
intensity, and duration.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The orgasmic dysfunction is not better accounted for by another Axis I
disorder (except another Sexual Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or a general medical condition.
Specifytype:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors
302.75 Premature Ejaculation
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Premature Ejaculation is the persistent or recurrent onset of
orgasm and ejaculation with minimal sexual stimulation before, on, or shortly after
penetration and before the person wishes it (Criterion A). The clinician must take into
account factors that affect duration of the excitement phase, such as age, novelty of the
sexual partner or situation, and recent frequency of sexual activity. The majority of males
with this disorder can delay orgasm during self-masturbation for a considerably longer
time than during coitus. Partners' estimates of the duration of time from the beginning
of sexual activity until ejaculation as well as their judgment of whether Premature
Ejaculation is a problem can be quite disparate. The disturbance must cause marked
distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion B). The premature ejaculation is not due
exclusively to the direct effects of a substance (e.g., withdrawal from opioids) (Criterion C).510
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Premature Ejaculation. (See descriptions on p. 494.)
Associated Features and Disorders
Like other Sexual Dysfunctions, Premature Ejaculation may create tension in a relation-
ship. Some unmarried males hesitate to begin dating new partners out of fear of
embarrassment from the disorder. This can contribute to social isolation.
Course
A majority of young males learn to delay orgasm with sexual experience and aging,
but some continue to ejaculate prematurely and may seek help for the disorder. Some
males are able to delay ejaculation in a long-term relationship but experience a
recurrence of Premature Ejaculation when they have a new partner. Typically,
Premature Ejaculation is seen in young men and is present from their first attempts at
intercourse. However, some males lose the ability to delay orgasm after a period of
adequate function. When onset occurs after a period of adequate sexual function, the
context is often a decreased frequency of sexual activity, intense performance anxiety
with a new partner, or loss of ejaculatory control related to difficulty achieving or
maintaining erections. Some males who have stopped regular use of alcohol may
develop Premature Ejaculation because they relied on their drinking to delay orgasm
instead of learning behavioral strategies.
Differential Diagnosis
Premature Ejaculation should be distinguished from erectile dysfunction related to
the development of a general medical condition (see p. 515). Some individuals with
erectile dysfunction may omit their usual strategies for delaying orgasm. Others require
prolonged noncoital stimulation to develop a degree of erection sufficient for intromis-
sion. In such individuals, sexual arousal may be so high that ejaculation occurs
immediately. Occasional problems with premature ejaculation that are not persis-
tent or recurrent or are not accompanied by marked distress or interpersonal difficulty
do not qualify for the diagnosis of Premature Ejaculation. The clinician should also take
into account the individual's age, overall sexual experience, recent sexual activity, and
the novelty of the partner. When problems with Premature Ejaculation are due
exclusively to substance use (e.g., Opioid Withdrawal), a Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction can be diagnosed (see p. 519).302.76 Dyspareunia
511
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.75 Premature Ejaculation
A. Persistent or recurrent ejaculation with minimal sexual stimulation
before, on, or shortly after penetration and before the person wishes it.
The clinician must take into account factors that affect duration of the
excitement phase, such as age, novelty of the sexual partner or situation,
and recent frequency of sexual activity.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The premature ejaculation is not due exclusively to the direct effects of
a substance (e.g., withdrawal from opioids).
Specifytype:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors
Sexual Pain Disorders
302.76 Dyspareunia
(Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Dyspareunia is genital pain that is associated with sexual
intercourse (Criterion A). Although it is most commonly experienced during coitus, it
may also occur before or after intercourse. The disorder can occur in both males and
females. In females, the pain may be described as superficial during intromission or as
deep during penile thrusting. The intensity of the symptoms may range from mild
discomfort to sharp pain. The disturbance must cause marked distress or interpersonal
difficulty (Criterion B). The disturbance is not caused exclusively by Vaginismus or lack
of lubrication, is not better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (except for another
Sexual Dysfunction), and is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition (Criterion C).
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Dyspareunia. (See descriptions on p. 494.)512
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Dyspareunia is rarely a chief complaint in mental health settings. Individuals with
Dyspareunia typically seek treatment in general medical settings. The physical exami-
nation for individuals with this disorder typically does not demonstrate genital abnor-
malities. The repeated experience of genital pain during coitus may result in the
avoidance of sexual experience, disrupting existing sexual relationships or limiting the
development of new sexual relationships.
Course
The limited amount of information available suggests that the course of Dyspareunia
tends to be chronic.
Differential
Diagnosis
Dyspareunia must be distinguished from Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General
Medical Condition (see p. 515). The appropriate diagnosis would be Sexual Dysfunc-
tion Due to a General Medical Condition when the dysfunction is judged to be due
exclusively to the physiological effects of a specified general medical condition (e.g.,
insufficient vaginal lubrication; pelvic pathology such as vaginal or urinary tract
infections, vaginal scar tissue, endometriosis, or adhesions; postmenopausal vaginal
atrophy; temporary estrogen deprivation during lactation; urinary tract irritation or
infection; or gastrointestinal conditions). This determination is based on history, labora-
tory findings, or physical examination. If both Dyspareunia and a general medical
condition are present but it is judged that the sexual dysfunction is not due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of the general medical condition, then a diagnosis of
Dyspareunia, Due to Combined Factors, is made.
In contrast to Dyspareunia, a Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction is judged
to be due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a substance (see p. 519).
Painful orgasm has been reported with fluphenazine, thioridazine, and amoxapine. If
both Dyspareunia and substance use are present but it is judged that the sexual
dysfunction is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of the substance
use, then Dyspareunia, Due to Combined Factors, is diagnosed.
If the sexual pain is judged to be due exclusively to the physiological effects of both
a general medical condition and substance use, both Sexual Dysfunction Due to a
General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction are diagnosed.
Dyspareunia is not diagnosed if it is caused exclusively by Vaginismus or a lack of
lubrication. An additional diagnosis of Dyspareunia is usually not made if the sexual
dysfunction is better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (e.g., Somatization
Disorder). The additional diagnosis may be made when the orgasmic difficulty predates
the Axis I disorder or is a focus of independent clinical attention. Dyspareunia can also
occur in association with other Sexual Dysfunctions (except Vaginismus) and if criteria
for both are met, both should be coded. Occasional pain associated with sexual
intercourse that is not persistent or recurrent or is not accompanied by marked distress
or interpersonal difficulty is not considered to be Dyspareunia.306.51 Vaginismus
513
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.76 Dyspareunia
A. Recurrent or persistent genital pain associated with sexual intercourse
in either a male or a female.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The disturbance is not caused exclusively by Vaginismus or lack of
lubrication, is not better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (except
another Sexual Dysfunction), and is not due exclusively to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication)
or a general medical condition.
Specify type:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors
306.51 Vaginismus
(Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Vaginismus is the recurrent or persistent involuntary contraction
of the perineal muscles surrounding the outer third of the vagina when vaginal
penetration with penis, finger, tampon, or speculum is attempted (Criterion A). The
disturbance must cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion B). The
disturbance is not better accounted for by another Axis I disorder (except another Sexual
Dysfunction) and is not due exclusively to the direct physiological effects of a general
medical condition (Criterion C). In some females, even the anticipation of vaginal
insertion may result in muscle spasm. The contraction may range from mild, inducing
some tightness and discomfort, to severe, preventing penetration.
Subtypes
Subtypes are provided to indicate onset (Lifelong versus Acquired), context (Gener-
alized versus Situational), and etiological factors (Due to Psychological Factors, Due
to Combined Factors) for Vaginismus. (See descriptions on p. 494.)514
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Sexual responses (e.g., desire, pleasure, orgasmic capacity) may not be impaired unless
penetration is attempted or anticipated. The physical obstruction due to muscle
contraction usually prevents coitus. The condition, therefore, can limit the development
of sexual relationships and disrupt existing relationships. Cases of unconsummated
marriages and infertility have been found to be associated with this condition. The
diagnosis is often made during routine gynecological examinations when response to
the pelvic examination results in the readily observed contraction of the vaginal outlet.
In some cases, the intensity of the contraction may be so severe or prolonged as to cause
pain. However, Vaginismus occurs in some women during sexual activity but not during
a gynecological examination. The disorder is more often found in younger than in older
females, in females with negative attitudes toward sex, and in females who have a history
of being sexually abused or traumatized.
Course
Lifelong Vaginismus usually has an abrupt onset, first manifest during initial attempts at
sexual penetration by a partner or during the first gynecological examination. Once the
disorder is established, the course is usually chronic unless ameliorated by treatment.
Acquired Vaginismus also may occur suddenly in response to a sexual trauma or a
general medical condition.
Differential
Diagnosis
Vaginismus must be distinguished from a Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General
Medical Condition (see p. 515). The appropriate diagnosis would be Sexual Dysfunc-
tion Due to a General Medical Condition when the dysfunction is judged to be due
exclusively to the physiological effects of a specified general medical condition (e.g.,
endometriosis or vaginal infection). This determination is based on history, laboratory
findings, or physical examination. Vaginismus may remain as a residual problem after
resolution of the general medical condition. If both Vaginismus and a general medical
condition are present but it is judged that the vaginal spasms are not due exclusively to
the direct physiological effects of the general medical condition, a diagnosis of
Vaginismus, Due to Combined Factors, is made.
Vaginismus may also occur in association with other Sexual Dysfunctions (e.g.,
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder). If so, both should be noted. Although pain
associated with sexual intercourse may occur with Vaginismus, an additional diagnosis
of Dyspareunia is not given. An additional diagnosis of Vaginismus is usually not made
if the vaginal spasms are better accounted for by another Axis I condition (e.g.,
Somatization Disorder). The additional diagnosis may be made when the vaginal spasms
predate the Axis I disorder or are a focus of independent clinical attention.Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition
515
I Diagnostic criteria for 306.51 Vaginismus
A. Recurrent or persistent involuntary spasm of the musculature of the outer
third of the vagina that interferes with sexual intercourse.
B. The disturbance causes marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another Axis I disorder
(e.g., Somatization Disorder) and is not due exclusively to the direct
physiological effects of a general medical condition.
Specify type:
Lifelong Type
Acquired Type
Specify type:
Generalized Type
Situational Type
Specify:
Due to Psychological Factors
Due to Combined Factors
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a
General Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition is the
presence of clinically significant sexual dysfunction that is judged to be due exclusively
to the direct physiological effects of a general medical condition. The sexual dysfunction
can involve pain associated with intercourse, hypoactive sexual desire, male erectile
dysfunction, or other forms of sexual dysfunction (e.g., Orgasmic Disorders) and must
cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion A). There must be evidence
from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the dysfunction is
fully explained by the direct physiological effects of a general medical condition
(Criterion B). The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., Major Depressive Disorder) (Criterion C).
In determining whether the sexual dysfunction is exclusively due to a general
medical condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical
condition. Further, the clinician must establish that the sexual dysfunction is etiologically
related to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful
and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment.
Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship
between the sexual dysfunction and the general medical condition is etiological, several
considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence
of a temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general516
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
medical condition and that of the sexual dysfunction. A second consideration is the
presence of features that are atypical of a primary Sexual Dysfunction (e.g., atypical age
at onset or course). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct
association between the general medical condition in question and the development of
the sexual dysfunction can provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular
situation. In addition, the clinician must also judge that the disturbance is not better
accounted for by a primary Sexual Dysfunction, a Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunc-
tion, or another primary mental disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder). These
determinations are explained in greater detail in the "Mental Disorders Due to a General
Medical Condition" section (p. 165).
In contrast, a Sexual Dysfunction diagnosis with the subtype "Due to Combined
Factors" is made if a combination of psychological factors and either a general medical
condition or a substance is judged to have an etiological role, but no one etiology is
sufficient to account for the dysfunction.
Subtypes
The diagnostic code and term for a Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical
Condition is selected based on the predominant Sexual Dysfunction. The terms listed
below should be used instead of the overall rubric "Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General
Medical Condition."
625.8 Female Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the
General Medical Condition]. This term is used if, in a female, deficient or
absent sexual desire is the predominant feature.
608.89 Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the
General Medical Condition]. This term is used if, in a male, deficient or absent
sexual desire is the predominant feature.
607.84 Male Erectile Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]. This term is used if male erectile dysfunction is the predominant
feature.
625.0 Female Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Con-
dition]. This term is used if, in a female, pain associated with intercourse is the
predominant feature.
608.89 Male Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Con-
dition]. This term is used if, in a male, pain associated with intercourse is the
predominant feature.
625.8 Other Female Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]. This term is used if, in a female, some other feature is
predominant (e.g., Orgasmic Disorder) or no feature predominates.
608.89 Other Male Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]. This term is used if, in a male, some other feature is
predominant (e.g., Orgasmic Disorder) or no feature predominates.
Recording Procedures
In recording the diagnosis of Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition,
the clinician should note both the specific phenomenology of the dysfunction (from the
list above) and the identified general medical condition judged to be causing theSexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition
517
dysfunction on Axis I (e.g., 607.84 Male Erectile Disorder Due to Diabetes Mellitus). The
ICD-9-CM code for the general medical condition is also noted on Axis III (e.g., 250.0
diabetes mellitus). (See Appendix G for a list of selected ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for
general medical conditions.)
Associated General Medical Conditions
A variety of general medical conditions can cause sexual dysfunction, including
neurological conditions (e.g., multiple sclerosis, spinal cord lesions, neuropathy, tem-
poral lobe lesions), endocrine conditions (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, hyper-
and hypoadrenocorticism, hyperprolactinemia, hypogonadal states, pituitary dysfunc-
tion), vascular conditions, and genitourinary conditions (e.g., testicular disease,
Peyronie's disease, urethral infections, postprostatectomy complications, genital injury
or infection, atrophic vaginitis, infections of the vagina and external genitalia, postsurgi-
cal complications such as episiotomy scars, shortened vagina, cystitis, endometriosis,
uterine prolapse, pelvic infections, neoplasms). Current clinical experience suggests that
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition is usually generalized. The
associated physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence
or onset reflect the etiological general medical condition.
Differential
Diagnosis
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition is diagnosed only if the sexual
dysfunction is fully explained by the direct effects of a general medical condition. If
psychological factors also play a role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance
of a sexual dysfunction, the diagnosis is the primary Sexual Dysfunction (with the
subtype Due to Combined Factors). In determining whether the sexual dysfunction is
primary or exclusively due to the direct effects of a general medical condition, a
comprehensive psychosexual and medical history is the most important component of
the evaluation. For males, tests such as nocturnal penile tumescence, vascular studies,
and injection of tissue activators may be helpful in the assessment. Careful gynecological
examination is important in making these determinations in women, especially in
assessing Sexual Pain Disorders in females. Neurological evaluation and endocrine
assessment may be helpful in both men and women.
If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance use (including medications),
withdrawal from a substance, or exposure to a toxin, and that the sexual dysfunction is
fully explained by the direct effects of the substance, a Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction should be considered. The clinician should inquire carefully about the
nature and extent of substance use, including medications. Symptoms that occur during
or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of) Substance Intoxication or after medication use
may be especially indicative of a Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, depending on
the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use. If the clinician has
ascertained that the sexual dysfunction is due to both a general medical condition and
substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical
Condition and Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction) can be given.
Hypoactive sexual desire, arousal dysfunction, and, to a lesser extent, orgasmic
dysfunction can also occur as symptoms of Major Depressive Disorder. In Major
Depressive Disorder, no specific and direct causative pathophysiological mechanisms518
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
associated with a general medical condition can be demonstrated. Sexual Dysfunction
Due to a General Medical Condition must be distinguished from the diminished sexual
interest and functioning that may accompany aging.
I Diagnostic criteria for Sexual Dysfunction Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. Clinically significant sexual dysfunction that results in marked distress
or interpersonal difficulty predominates in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the sexual dysfunction is fully explained by the direct
physiological effects of a general medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., Major Depressive Disorder).
Select code and term based on the predominant sexual dysfunction:
625.8 Female Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical Condition]: if deficient or absent
sexual desire is the predominant feature
608.89 Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ... [Indicate
the General Medical Condition]: if deficient or absent sexual desire is
the predominant feature
607.84 Male Erectile Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]: if male erectile dysfunction is the predominant
feature
625.0 Female Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]: if pain associated with intercourse is the predominant
feature
608.89 Male Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]: if pain associated with intercourse is the predominant
feature
625.8 Other Female Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the
General Medical Condition]: if some other feature is predominant
(e.g., Orgasmic Disorder) or no feature predominates
608.89 Other Male Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the
General Medical Condition]: if some other feature is predominant
(e.g., Orgasmic Disorder) or no feature predominates
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
607.84 Male Erectile Disorder Due to Diabetes Mellitus; also code the general
medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for codes).Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
519
Substance-Induced
Sexual Dysfunction
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction is a clinically significant
sexual dysfunction that results in marked distress or interpersonal difficulty (Criterion
A). Depending on the substance involved, the dysfunction may involve impaired desire,
impaired arousal, impaired orgasm, or sexual pain. The dysfunction is judged to be fully
explained by the direct physiological effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a
medication, or toxin exposure) (Criterion B). The disturbance must not be better
accounted for by a Sexual Dysfunction that is not substance induced (Criterion C). This
diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxication only when
the sexual symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the intoxication
syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention. For a more detailed discussion of Substance-Related Disorders, see p. 175.
A Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction is distinguished from a primary Sexual
Dysfunction by considering onset and course. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence
of intoxication from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings. Substance-
Induced Sexual Dysfunctions arise only in association with intoxication, whereas primary
Sexual Dysfunctions may precede the onset of substance use or occur during times of
sustained abstinence from the substance. Factors suggesting that the dysfunction is better
accounted for by a primary Sexual Dysfunction include persistence of the dysfunction
for a substantial period of time (i.e., about a month) after the end of Substance
Intoxication; the development of a dysfunction that is substantially in excess of what
would be expected given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of
use; or a history of prior recurrent primary Sexual Dysfunctions.
Specifiers
The following specifiers for Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction are selected based
on the predominant sexual dysfunction. Although the clinical presentation of the sexual
dysfunction may resemble one of the specific primary Sexual Dysfunctions, the full
criteria for one of these disorders need not be met.
With Impaired Desire. This specifier is used if deficient or absent sexual desire
is the predominant feature.
With Impaired Arousal. This specifier is used if impaired sexual arousal (e.g.,
erectile dysfunction, impaired lubrication) is the predominant feature.
With Impaired Orgasm. This specifier is used if impaired orgasm is the
predominant feature.
With Sexual Pain. This specifier is used if pain associated with intercourse is
the predominant feature.
Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunctions usually have their onset during Substance
Intoxication, and this may be indicated by noting With Onset During Intoxication.520
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Recording Procedures
The name of the Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction begins with the specific
substance (e.g., alcohol, fluoxetine) that is presumed to be causing the sexual dysfunc-
tion. The diagnostic code is selected from the listing of classes of substances provided
in the criteria set. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine),
the code for "Other Substance" should be used. In addition, for medications prescribed
at therapeutic doses, the specific medication can be indicated by listing the appropriate
E-code on Axis I (see Appendix G). The name of the disorder is followed by the
specification of predominant symptom presentation (e.g., 292.89 Cocaine-Induced
Sexual Dysfunction, With Impaired Arousal). When more than one substance is judged
to play a significant role in the development of the sexual dysfunction, each should be
listed separately (e.g., 291.8 Alcohol-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, With Impaired
Arousal; 292.89 Fluoxetine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, With Impaired Orgasm). If a
substance is judged to be the etiological factor, but the specific substance or class of
substances is unknown, the category 292.89 Unknown Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction may be used.
Specific Substances
Sexual Dysfunctions can occur in association with intoxication with the following
classes of substances: alcohol; amphetamine and related substances; cocaine; opioids;
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; and other or unknown substances. Acute intoxi-
cation with or chronic abuse of substances of abuse has been reported to decrease sexual
interest and cause arousal problems in both sexes. A decrease in sexual interest (both
sexes), arousal disorders (both sexes), and orgasmic disorders (more common in men)
may also be caused by prescribed medications including antihypertensives, histamine
H 2 receptor antagonists, antidepressants, neuroleptics, anxiolytics, anabolic steroids, and
antiepileptics. Painful orgasm has been reported with fluphenazine, thioridazine, and
amoxapine. Priapism has been reported with use of chlorpromazine, trazodone, and
clozapine and following penile injections of papaverine or prostaglandin. Serotonin
reuptake blockers may cause decreased sexual desire or arousal disorders. Medications
such as antihypertensive agents or anabolic steroids may also promote depressed or
irritable mood in addition to the sexual dysfunction, and an additional diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder may be warranted. Current clinical experience
strongly suggests that Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction is usually generalized.
Differential
Diagnosis
Sexual dysfunctions commonly occur in Substance Intoxication. The diagnosis of the
substance-specific Intoxication will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presenta-
tion. A diagnosis of Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction should be made instead of
a diagnosis of Substance Intoxication only when the dysfunction is judged to be in excess
of that usually associated with the intoxication syndrome and when the symptoms are
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. If psychological factors also
play a role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of a sexual dysfunction,
the diagnosis is the primary Sexual Dysfunction (with the subtype Due to Combined
Factors).
A Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction is distinguished from a primary SexualSubstance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
521
Dysfunction by the fact that the symptoms are judged to be fully explained by the
direct effects of a substance (see p. 519).
A Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction due to a prescribed treatment for a mental
disorder or general medical condition must have its onset while the person is receiving
the medication (e.g., antihypertensive medication). Once the treatment is discontinued,
the sexual dysfunction will remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life
of the substance). If the sexual dysfunction persists, other causes for the dysfunction
should be considered. Side effects of prescribed medications that affect sexual function
may lead individuals to be noncompliant with the medication regimen if they value
sexual performance over the benefits of the medication.
Because individuals with general medical conditions often take medications for
those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the sexual dysfunction
is caused by the physiological consequences of the general medical condition rather
than the medication, in which case Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical
Condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a
judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the general medical condition (e.g.,
medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically for
that person whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained
that the dysfunction is due to both a general medical condition and substance use, both
diagnoses (i.e., Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-
Induced Sexual Dysfunction) are given. When there is insufficient evidence to determine
whether the Sexual Dysfunction is due to a substance (including a medication) or to a
general medical condition or is primary (i.e., not due to either a substance or a general
medical condition), Sexual Dysfunction Not Otherwise Specified would be indicated.
Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction
A. Clinically significant sexual dysfunction that results in marked distress
or interpersonal difficulty predominates in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the sexual dysfunction is fully explained by substance use
as manifested by either (1) or (2):
(1) the symptoms in Criterion A developed during, or within a month
of, Substance Intoxication
(2) medication use is etiologically related to the disturbance
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by a Sexual Dysfunction that
is not substance induced. Evidence that the symptoms are better
accounted for by a Sexual Dysfunction that is not substance induced
might include the following: the symptoms precede the onset of the
substance use or dependence (or medication use); the symptoms persist
for a substantial period of time (e.g., about a month) after the cessation
of intoxication, or are substantially in excess of what would be expected
(continued)522
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction (continued)
given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use;
or there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent
non-substance-induced Sexual Dysfunction (e.g., a history of recurrent
non-substance-related episodes).
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxi-
cation only when the sexual dysfunction is in excess of that usually associated with
the intoxication syndrome and when the dysfunction is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
Code (Specific Substance|-Induced Sexual Dysfunction:
(291.8 Alcohol; 292.89 Amphetamine [or Amphetamine-Like Substance];
292.89 Cocaine; 292.89 Opioid; 292.89 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic;
292.89 Other [or Unknown] Substance)
Specify if:
With Impaired Desire
With Impaired Arousal
With Impaired Orgasm
With Sexual Pain
Specify if:
With Onset During Intoxication: if the criteria are met for Intoxication
with the substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication
syndrome
302.70 Sexual Dysfunction Not Otherwise Specified
This category includes sexual dysfunctions that do not meet criteria for any specific
Sexual Dysfunction. Examples include
1. No (or substantially diminished) subjective erotic feelings despite otherwise-
normal arousal and orgasm
2. Situations in which the clinician has concluded that a sexual dysfunction is
present but is unable to determine whether it is primary, due to a general medical
condition, or substance induced
Paraphilias
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of a Paraphilia are recurrent, intense sexually arousing fantasies,
sexual urges, or behaviors generally involving 1) nonhuman objects, 2) the suffering orParaphilias
523
humiliation of oneself or one's partner, or 3) children or other nonconsenting persons,
that occur over a period of at least 6 months (Criterion A). For some individuals,
paraphiliac fantasies or stimuli are obligatory for erotic arousal and are always included
in sexual activity. In other cases, the paraphiliac preferences occur only episodically
(e.g., perhaps during periods of stress), whereas at other times the person is able to
function sexually without paraphiliac fantasies or stimuli. The behavior, sexual urges,
or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning (Criterion B).
Paraphiliac imagery may be acted out with a nonconsenting partner in a way that
may be injurious to the partner (as in Sexual Sadism or Pedophilia). The individual may
be subject to arrest and incarceration. Sexual offenses against children constitute a
significant proportion of all reported criminal sex acts, and individuals with Exhibition-
ism, Pedophilia, and Voyeurism make up the majority of apprehended sex offenders.
In some situations, acting out the paraphiliac imagery may lead to self-injury (as in Sexual
Masochism). Social and sexual relationships may suffer if others find the unusual sexual
behavior shameful or repugnant or if the individual's sexual partner refuses to cooperate
in the unusual sexual preferences. In some instances, the unusual behavior (e.g.,
exhibitionistic acts or the collection of fetish objects) may become the major sexual
activity in the individual's life. These individuals are rarely self-referred and usually come
to the attention of mental health professionals only when their behavior has brought
them into conflict with sexual partners or society.
The Paraphilias described here are conditions that have been specifically identified
by previous classifications. They include Exhibitionism (exposure of genitals), Fetishism
(use of nonliving objects), Frotteurism (touching and rubbing against a nonconsenting
person), Pedophilia (focus on prepubescent children), Sexual Masochism (receiving
humiliation or suffering), Sexual Sadism (inflicting humiliation or suffering), Transvestic
Fetishism (cross-dressing), and Voyeurism (observing sexual activity). A residual cate-
gory, Paraphilia Not Otherwise Specified, includes other Paraphilias that are less
frequently encountered. Not uncommonly, individuals have more than one Paraphilia.
Recording Procedures
The individual Paraphilias are differentiated based on the characteristic paraphiliac
focus. However, if the individual's sexual preferences meet criteria for more than one
Paraphilia, all should be diagnosed. The diagnostic code and terms are as follows: 302.4
Exhibitionism, 302.81 Fetishism, 302.89 Frotteurism, 302.2 Pedophilia, 302.83 Sexual
Masochism, 302.84 Sexual Sadism, 302.82 Voyeurism, 302.3 Transvestic Fetishism, and
302.9 Paraphilia Not Otherwise Specified.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. The preferred stimulus,
even within a particular Paraphilia, may be highly specific. Individuals who do not have
a consenting partner with whom their fantasies can be acted out may purchase the
services of prostitutes or may act out their fantasies with unwilling victims. Individuals
with a Paraphilia may select an occupation or develop a hobby or volunteer work that
brings them into contact with the desired stimulus (e.g., selling women's shoes or lingerie
[Fetishism], working with children [Pedophilia], or driving an ambulance [Sexual524
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Sadism]). They may selectively view, read, purchase, or collect photographs, films, and
textual depictions that focus on their preferred type of paraphiliac stimulus. Many
individuals with these disorders assert that the behavior causes them no distress and that
their only problem is social dysfunction as a result of the reaction of others to their
behavior. Others report extreme guilt, shame, and depression at having to engage in an
unusual sexual activity that is socially unacceptable or that they regard as immoral. There
is often impairment in the capacity for reciprocal, affectionate sexual activity, and Sexual
Dysfunctions may be present. Personality disturbances are also frequent and may be
severe enough to warrant a diagnosis of a Personality Disorder. Symptoms of depression
may develop in individuals with Paraphilias and may be accompanied by an increase
in the frequency and intensity of the paraphiliac behavior.
Associated laboratory findings. Penile plethysmography has been used in research
settings to assess various Paraphilias by measuring an individual's sexual arousal in
response to visual and auditory stimuli. The reliability and validity of this procedure in
clinical assessment have not been well established, and clinical experience suggests that
subjects can simulate response by manipulating mental images.
Associated general medical conditions. Frequent, unprotected sex may result in
infection with, or transmission of, a sexually transmitted disease. Sadistic or masochistic
behaviors may lead to injuries ranging in extent from minor to life threatening.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
The diagnosis of Paraphilias across cultures or religions is complicated by the fact that
what is considered deviant in one cultural setting may be more acceptable in another
setting. Except for Sexual Masochism, where the sex ratio is estimated to be 20 males
for each female, the other Paraphilias are almost never diagnosed in females, although
some cases have been reported.
Prevalence
Although Paraphilias are rarely diagnosed in general clinical facilities, the large commer-
cial market in paraphiliac pornography and paraphernalia suggests that its prevalence
in the community is likely to be higher. The most common presenting problems in clinics
that specialize in the treatment of Paraphilias are Pedophilia, Voyeurism, and Exhibi-
tionism. Sexual Masochism and Sexual Sadism are much less commonly seen. Approx-
imately one-half of the individuals with Paraphilias seen clinically are married.
Course
Certain of the fantasies and behaviors associated with Paraphilias may begin in childhood
or early adolescence but become better defined and elaborated during adolescence and
early adulthood. Elaboration and revision of paraphiliac fantasies may continue over the
lifetime of the individual. By definition, the fantasies and urges associated with these
disorders are recurrent. Many individuals report that the fantasies are always present but
that there are periods of time when the frequency of the fantasies and intensity of the
urges vary substantially. The disorders tend to be chronic and lifelong, but both the302.4 Exhibitionism
525
fantasies and the behaviors often diminish with advancing age in adults. The behaviors
may increase in response to psychosocial stressors, in relation to other mental disorders,
or with increased opportunity to engage in the Paraphilia.
Differential Diagnosis
A Paraphilia must be distinguished from the nonpathologicaluse of sexual fantasies,
behaviors, or objects as a stimulus for sexual excitement in individuals without a
Paraphilia. Fantasies, behaviors, or objects are paraphiliac only when they lead to
clinically significant distress or impairment (e.g., are obligatory, result in sexual
dysfunction, require participation of nonconsenting individuals, lead to legal complica-
tions, interfere with social relationships).
In Mental Retardation, Dementia, Personality Change Due to a General
Medical Condition, Substance Intoxication, a Manic Episode or Schizophrenia,
there may be a decrease in judgment, social skills, or impulse control that, in rare
instances, leads to unusual sexual behavior. This can be distinguished from a Paraphilia
by the fact that the unusual sexual behavior is not the individual's preferred or obligatory
pattern, the sexual symptoms occur exclusively during the course of these mental
disorders, and the unusual sexual acts tend to be isolated rather than recurrent and
usually have a later age at onset.
The individual Paraphilias can be distinguished based on differences in the
characteristic paraphiliac focus. However, if the individual's sexual preferences meet
criteria for more than one Paraphilia, all can be diagnosed. Exhibitionism must be
distinguished from public urination, which is sometimes offered as an explanation for
the behavior. Fetishism and Transvestic Fetishism both often involve articles of
feminine clothing. In Fetishism, the focus of sexual arousal is on the article of clothing
itself (e.g., panties), whereas in Transvestic Fetishism the sexual arousal comes from the
act of cross-dressing. Cross-dressing, which is present in Transvestic Fetishism, may
also be present in Sexual Masochism. In Sexual Masochism, it is the humiliation of
being forced to cross-dress, not the garments themselves, that is sexually exciting.
Cross-dressing may be associated with gender dysphoria. If some gender dysphoria
is present but the full criteria for Gender Identity Disorder are not met, the diagnosis is
Transvestic Fetishism, With Gender Dysphoria. Individuals should receive the
additional diagnosis of Gender Identity Disorder if their presentation meets the full
criteria for Gender Identity Disorder.
302.4
Exhibitionism
The paraphiliac focus in Exhibitionism involves the exposure of one's genitals to a
stranger. Sometimes the individual masturbates while exposing himself (or while
fantasizing exposing himself). If the person acts on these urges, there is generally no
attempt at further sexual activity with the stranger. In some cases, the individual is aware
of a desire to surprise or shock the observer. In other cases, the individual has the
sexually arousing fantasy that the observer will become sexually aroused. The onset
usually occurs before age 18 years, although it can begin at a later age. Few arrests are
made in the older age groups, which may suggest that the condition becomes less severe
after age 40 years.526
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for 302.4 Exhibitionism
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving the exposure of one's
genitals to an unsuspecting stranger.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
302.81
Fetishism
The paraphiliac focus in Fetishism involves the use of nonliving objects (the "fetish").
Among the more common fetish objects are women's underpants, bras, stockings, shoes,
boots, or other wearing apparel. The person with Fetishism frequently masturbates while
holding, rubbing, or smelling the fetish object or may ask the sexual partner to wear the
object during their sexual encounters. Usually the fetish is required or strongly preferred
for sexual excitement, and in its absence there may be erectile dysfunction in males.
This Paraphilia is not diagnosed when the fetishes are limited to articles of female
clothing used in cross-dressing, as in Transvestic Fetishism, or when the object is genitally
stimulating because it has been designed for that purpose (e.g., a vibrator). Usually the
Paraphilia begins by adolescence, although the fetish may have been endowed with
special significance earlier in childhood. Once established, Fetishism tends to be
chronic.
Diagnostic criteria for 302.81 Fetishism
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving the use of nonliving
objects (e.g., female undergarments).
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
C. The fetish objects are not limited to articles of female clothing used in
cross-dressing (as in Transvestic Fetishism) or devices designed for the
purpose of tactile genital stimulation (e.g., a vibrator).302.89 Frotteurism
527
302.89 Frotteurism
The paraphiliac focus of Frotteurism involves touching and rubbing against a noncon-
senting person. The behavior usually occurs in crowded places from which the individual
can more easily escape arrest (e.g., on busy sidewalks or in public transportation
vehicles). He rubs his genitals against the victim's thighs and buttocks or fondles her
genitalia or breasts with his hands. While doing this he usually fantasizes an exclusive,
caring relationship with the victim. However, he recognizes that to avoid possible
prosecution, he must escape detection after touching his victim. Usually the paraphilia
begins by adolescence. Most acts of frottage occur when the person is ages 15-25 years,
after which there is a gradual decline in frequency.
Diagnostic criteria for 302.89 Frotteurism
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving touching and rubbing
against a nonconsenting person.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
302.2 Pedophilia
The paraphiliac focus of Pedophilia involves sexual activity with a prepubescent child
(generally age 13 years or younger). The individual with Pedophilia must be age 16 years
or older and at least 5 years older than the child. For individuals in late adolescence
with Pedophilia, no precise age difference is specified, and clinical judgment must be
used; both the sexual maturity of the child and the age difference must be taken into
account. Individuals with Pedophilia generally report an attraction to children of a
particular age range. Some individuals prefer males, others females, and some are
aroused by both males and females. Those attracted to females usually prefer 8- to
10-year-olds, whereas those attracted to males usually prefer slightly older children.
Pedophilia involving female victims is reported more often than Pedophilia involving
male victims. Some individuals with Pedophilia are sexually attracted only to children
(Exclusive Type), whereas others are sometimes attracted to adults (Nonexclusive Type).
Individuals with Pedophilia who act on their urges with children may limit their activity
to undressing the child and looking, exposing themselves, masturbating in the presence
of the child, or gentle touching and fondling of the child. Others, however, perform
fellatio or cunnilingus on the child or penetrate the child's vagina, mouth, or anus with
their fingers, foreign objects, or penis and use varying degrees of force to do so. These
activities are commonly explained with excuses or rationalizations that they have
"educational value" for the child, that the child derives "sexual pleasure" from them, or528
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
that the child was "sexually provocative"—themes that are also common in pedophiliac
pornography.
Individuals may limit their activities to their own children, stepchildren, or relatives
or may victimize children outside their families. Some individuals with Pedophilia
threaten the child to prevent disclosure. Others, particularly those who frequently
victimize children, develop complicated techniques for obtaining access to children,
which may include winning the trust of a child's mother, marrying a woman with an
attractive child, trading children with other individuals with Pedophilia, or, in rare
instances, taking in foster children from nonindustrialized countries or abducting children
from strangers. Except in cases in which the disorder is associated with Sexual Sadism,
the person may be attentive to the child's needs in order to gain the child's affection,
interest, and loyalty and to prevent the child from reporting the sexual activity. The
disorder usually begins in adolescence, although some individuals with Pedophilia report
that they did not become aroused by children until middle age. The frequency of
pedophiliac behavior often fluctuates with psychosocial stress. The course is usually
chronic, especially in those attracted to males. The recidivism rate for individuals with
Pedophilia involving a preference for males is roughly twice that for those who prefer
females.
I Diagnostic criteria for 302.2 Pedophilia
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving sexual activity with a
prepubescent child or children (generally age 13 years or younger).
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
C. The person is at least age 16 years and at least 5 years older than the
child or children in Criterion A.
Note: Do not include an individual in late adolescence involved in an ongoing
sexual relationship with a 12- or 13-year-old.
Specify if:
Sexually Attracted to Males
Sexually Attracted to Females
Sexually Attracted to Both
Specify if:
Limited to Incest
Specify type:
Exclusive Type (attracted only to children)
Nonexclusive Type302.83 Sexual Masochism
529
302.83 Sexual Masochism
The paraphiliac focus of Sexual Masochism involves the act (real, not simulated) of being
humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer. Some individuals are bothered
by their masochistic fantasies, which may be invoked during sexual intercourse or
masturbation but not otherwise acted on. In such cases, the masochistic fantasies usually
involve being raped while being held or bound by others so that there is no possibility
of escape. Others act on the masochistic sexual urges by themselves (e.g., binding
themselves, sticking themselves with pins, shocking themselves electrically, or self-
mutilation) or with a partner. Masochistic acts that may be sought with a partner include
restraint (physical bondage), blindfolding (sensory bondage), paddling, spanking,
whipping, beating, electrical shocks, cutting, "pinning and piercing" (infibulation), and
humiliation (e.g., being urinated or defecated on, being forced to crawl and bark like a
dog, or being subjected to verbal abuse). Forced cross-dressing may be sought for its
humiliating associations. The individual may have a desire to be treated as a helpless
infant and clothed in diapers ("infantilism"). One particularly dangerous form of Sexual
Masochism, called "hypoxyphilia," involves sexual arousal by oxygen deprivation
obtained by means of chest compression, noose, ligature, plastic bag, mask, or chemical
(often a volatile nitrite that produces a temporary decrease in brain oxygenation by
peripheral vasodilation). Oxygen-depriving activities may be engaged in alone or with
a partner. Because of equipment malfunction, errors in the placement of the noose or
ligature, or other mistakes, accidental deaths sometimes occur. Data from the United
States, England, Australia, and Canada indicate that one to two hypoxyphilia-caused
deaths per million population are detected and reported each year. Some males with
Sexual Masochism also have Fetishism, Transvestic Fetishism, or Sexual Sadism. Mas-
ochistic sexual fantasies are likely to have been present in childhood. The age at which
masochistic activities with partners first begins is variable, but is commonly by early
adulthood. Sexual Masochism is usually chronic, and the person tends to repeat the
same masochistic act. Some individuals with Sexual Masochism may engage in maso-
chistic acts for many years without increasing the potential injuriousness of their acts.
Others, however, increase the severity of the masochistic acts over time or during periods
of stress, which may eventually result in injury or even death.
Diagnostic criteria for 302.83 Sexual Masochism
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving the act (real, not simu-
lated) of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.530
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
302.84 Sexual Sadism
The paraphiliac focus of Sexual Sadism involves acts (real, not simulated) in which the
individual derives sexual excitement from the psychological or physical suffering
(including humiliation) of the victim. Some individuals with this Paraphilia are bothered
by their sadistic fantasies, which may be invoked during sexual activity but not otherwise
acted on; in such cases the sadistic fantasies usually involve having complete control
over the victim, who is terrified by anticipation of the impending sadistic act. Others act
on the sadistic sexual urges with a consenting partner (who may have Sexual Masochism)
who willingly suffers pain or humiliation. Still others with Sexual Sadism act on their
sadistic sexual urges with nonconsenting victims. In all of these cases, it is the suffering
of the victim that is sexually arousing. Sadistic fantasies or acts may involve activities
that indicate the dominance of the person over the victim (e.g., forcing the victim to
crawl or keeping the victim in a cage). They may also involve restraint, blindfolding,
paddling, spanking, whipping, pinching, beating, burning, electrical shocks, rape,
cutting, stabbing, strangulation, torture, mutilation, or killing. Sadistic sexual fantasies
are likely to have been present in childhood. The age at onset of sadistic activities is
variable, but is commonly by early adulthood. Sexual Sadism is usually chronic. When
Sexual Sadism is practiced with nonconsenting partners, the activity is likely to be
repeated until the person with Sexual Sadism is apprehended. Some individuals with
Sexual Sadism may engage in sadistic acts for many years without a need to increase
the potential for inflicting serious physical damage. Usually, however, the severity of the
sadistic acts increases over time. When Sexual Sadism is severe, and especially when it
is associated with Antisocial Personality Disorder, individuals with Sexual Sadism may
seriously injure or kill their victims.
Diagnostic criteria for 302.84 Sexual Sadism
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving acts (real, not simulated)
in which the psychological or physical suffering (including humiliation)
of the victim is sexually exciting to the person.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
302.3 Transvestic Fetishism
The paraphiliac focus of Transvestic Fetishism involves cross-dressing. Usually the male
with Transvestic Fetishism keeps a collection of female clothes that he intermittently
uses to cross-dress. While cross-dressed, he usually masturbates, imagining himself to
be both the male subject and the female object of his sexual fantasy. This disorder has302.3 Transvestic Fetishism
531
been described only in heterosexual males. Transvestic Fetishism is not diagnosed when
cross-dressing occurs exclusively during the course of Gender Identity Disorder.
Transvestic phenomena range from occasional solitary wearing of female clothes to
extensive involvement in a transvestic subculture. Some males wear a single item of
women's apparel (e.g., underwear or hosiery) under their masculine attire. Other males
with Transvestic Fetishism dress entirely as females and wear makeup. The degree to
which the cross-dressed individual successfully appears to be a female varies, depending
on mannerisms, body habitus, and cross-dressing skill. When not cross-dressed, the male
with Transvestic Fetishism is usually unremarkably masculine. Although his basic
preference is heterosexual, he tends to have few sexual partners and may have engaged
in occasional homosexual acts. An associated feature may be the presence of Sexual
Masochism. The disorder typically begins with cross-dressing in childhood or early
adolescence. In many cases, the cross-dressing is not done in public until adulthood.
The initial experience may involve partial or total cross-dressing; partial cross-dressing
often progresses to complete cross-dressing. A favored article of clothing may become
erotic in itself and may be used habitually, first in masturbation and later in intercourse.
In some individuals, the motivation for cross-dressing may change over time, temporarily
or permanently, with sexual arousal in response to the cross-dressing diminishing or
disappearing. In such instances, the cross-dressing becomes an antidote to anxiety or
depression or contributes to a sense of peace and calm. In other individuals, gender
dysphoria may emerge, especially under situational stress with or without symptoms of
depression. For a small number of individuals, the gender dysphoria becomes a fixed
part of the clinical picture and is accompanied by the desire to dress and live permanently
as a female and to seek hormonal or surgical reassignment. Individuals with Transvestic
Fetishism often seek treatment when gender dysphoria emerges. The subtype With
Gender Dysphoria is provided to allow the clinician to note the presence of gender
dysphoria as part of Transvestic Fetishism.
• Diagnostic criteria for 302.3 Transvestic Fetishism
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, in a heterosexual male, recurrent,
intense sexually arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving
cross-dressing.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
Specify if:
With Gender Dysphoria: if the person has persistent discomfort with
gender role or identity532
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
302.82 Voyeurism
The paraphiliac focus of Voyeurism involves the act of observing unsuspecting individ-
uals, usually strangers, who are naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in sexual
activity. The act of looking ("peeping") is for the purpose of achieving sexual excitement,
and generally no sexual activity with the observed person is sought. Orgasm, usually
produced by masturbation, may occur during the voyeuristic activity or later in response
to the memory of what the person has witnessed. Often these individuals have the
fantasy of having a sexual experience with the observed person, but in reality this rarely
occurs. In its severe form, peeping constitutes the exclusive form of sexual activity. The
onset of voyeuristic behavior is usually before age 15 years. The course tends to be
chronic.
Diagnostic criteria for 302.82 Voyeurism
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving the act of observing an
unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or
engaging in sexual activity.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
302.9 Paraphilia Not Otherwise Specified
This category is included for coding Paraphilias that do not meet the criteria for any of
the specific categories. Examples include, but are not limited to, telephone scatologia
(obscene phone calls), necrophilia (corpses), partialism (exclusive focus on part of
body), zoophilia (animals), coprophilia (feces), klismaphilia (enemas), and urophilia
(urine).
Gender Identity Disorders
Gender Identity Disorder
Diagnostic Features
There are two components of Gender Identity Disorder, both of which must be present
to make the diagnosis. There must be evidence of a strong and persistent cross-gender
identification, which is the desire to be, or the insistence that one is, of the other sexGender Identity Disorder
533
(Criterion A). This cross-gender identification must not merely be a desire for any
perceived cultural advantages of being the other sex. There must also be evidence of
persistent discomfort about one's assigned sex or a sense of inappropriateness in the
gender role of that sex (Criterion B). The diagnosis is not made if the individual has a
concurrent physical intersex condition (e.g., androgen insensitivity syndrome or con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia) (Criterion C). To make the diagnosis, there must be evidence
of clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning (Criterion D).
In boys, the cross-gender identification is manifested by a marked preoccupation
with traditionally feminine activities. They may have a preference for dressing in girls'
or women's clothes or may improvise such items from available materials when genuine
articles are unavailable. Towels, aprons, and scarves are often used to represent long
hair or skirts. There is a strong attraction for the stereotypical games and pastimes of
girls. They particularly enjoy playing house, drawing pictures of beautiful girls and
princesses, and watching television or videos of their favorite female characters.
Stereotypical female-type dolls, such as Barbie, are often their favorite toys, and girls
are their preferred playmates. When playing "house," these boys role-play female figures,
most commonly "mother roles," and often are quite preoccupied with female fantasy
figures. They avoid rough-and-tumble play and competitive sports and have little interest
in cars and trucks or other nonaggressive but stereotypical boy's toys. They may express
a wish to be a girl and assert that they will grow up to be a woman. They may insist on
sitting to urinate and pretend not to have a penis by pushing it in between their legs.
More rarely, boys with Gender Identity Disorder may state that they find their penis or
testes disgusting, that they want to remove them, or that they have, or wish to have, a
vagina.
Girls with Gender Identity Disorder display intense negative reactions to parental
expectations or attempts to have them wear dresses or other feminine attire. Some may
refuse to attend school or social events where such clothes may be required. They prefer
boy's clothing and short hair, are often misidentified by strangers as boys, and may ask
to be called by a boy's name. Their fantasy heroes are most often powerful male figures,
such as Batman or Superman. These girls prefer boys as playmates, with whom they
share interests in contact sports, rough-and-tumble play, and traditional boyhood games.
They show little interest in dolls or any form of feminine dress up or role-play activity.
A girl with this disorder may occasionally refuse to urinate in a sitting position. She may
claim that she has or will grow a penis and may not want to grow breasts or to menstruate.
She may assert that she will grow up to be a man. Such girls typically reveal marked
cross-gender identification in role-play, dreams, and fantasies.
Adults with Gender Identity Disorder are preoccupied with their wish to live as a
member of the other sex. This preoccupation may be manifested as an intense desire
to adopt the social role of the other sex or to acquire the physical appearance of the
other sex through hormonal or surgical manipulation. Adults with this disorder are
uncomfortable being regarded by others as, or functioning in society as, a member of
their designated sex. To varying degrees, they adopt the behavior, dress, and mannerisms
of the other sex. In private, these individuals may spend much time cross-dressed and
working on the appearance of being the other sex. Many attempt to pass in public as
the other sex. With cross-dressing and hormonal treatment (and for males, electrolysis),
many individuals with this disorder may pass convincingly as the other sex. The sexual
activity of these individuals with same-sex partners is generally constrained by the
preference that their partners neither see nor touch their genitals. For some males who534
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
present later in life, (often following marriage), sexual activity with a woman is
accompanied by the fantasy of being lesbian lovers or that his partner is a man and he
is a woman.
In adolescents, the clinical features may resemble either those of children or those
of adults, depending on the individual's developmental level, and the criteria should be
applied accordingly. In a younger adolescent, it may be more difficult to arrive at an
accurate diagnosis because of the adolescent's guardedness. This may be increased if
the adolescent feels ambivalent about cross-gender identification or feels that it is
unacceptable to the family. The adolescent may be referred because the parents or
teachers are concerned about social isolation or peer teasing and rejection. In such
circumstances, the diagnosis should be reserved for those adolescents who appear quite
cross-gender identified in their dress and who engage in behaviors that suggest
significant cross-gender identification (e.g., shaving legs in males). Clarifying the
diagnosis in children and adolescents may require monitoring over an extended period
of time.
Distress or disability in individuals with Gender Identity Disorder is manifested
differently across the life cycle. In young children, distress is manifested by the stated
unhappiness about their assigned sex. Preoccupation with cross-gender wishes often
interferes with ordinary activities. In older children, failure to develop age-appropriate
same-sex peer relationships and skills often leads to isolation and distress, and some
children may refuse to attend school because of teasing or pressure to dress in attire
stereotypical of their assigned sex. In adolescents and adults, preoccupation with
cross-gender wishes often interferes with ordinary activities. Relationship difficulties are
common and functioning at school or at work may be impaired.
Specifiers
For sexually mature individuals, the following specifiers may be noted based on the
individual's sexual orientation: Sexually Attracted to Males, Sexually Attracted to
Females, Sexually Attracted to Both, and Sexually Attracted to Neither. Males with
Gender Identity Disorder include substantial proportions with all four specifiers. Virtually
all females with Gender Identity Disorder will receive the same specifier—Sexually
Attracted to Females—although there are exceptional cases involving females who are
Sexually Attracted to Males.
Recording Procedures
The assigned diagnostic code depends on the individual's current age: if the disorder
occurs in childhood, the code 302.6 is used; for an adolescent or adult, 302.85 is used.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Many individuals with
Gender Identity Disorder become socially isolated. Isolation and ostracism contribute to
low self-esteem and may lead to school aversion or dropping out of school. Peer
ostracism and teasing are especially common sequelae for boys with the disorder. Boys
with Gender Identity Disorder often show marked feminine mannerisms and speech
patterns.Gender Identity Disorder
535
The disturbance can be so pervasive that the mental lives of some individuals revolve
only around those activities that lessen gender distress. They are often preoccupied with
appearance, especially early in the transition to living in the opposite sex role.
Relationships with one or both parents also may be seriously impaired. Some males with
Gender Identity Disorder resort to self-treatment with hormones and may very rarely
perform their own castration or penectomy. Especially in urban centers, some males
with the disorder may engage in prostitution, which places them at high risk for human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Suicide attempts and Substance-Related Disor-
ders are commonly associated.
Children with Gender Identity Disorder may manifest coexisting Separation Anxiety
Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and symptoms of depression. Adolescents are
particularly at risk for depression and suicidal ideation and suicide attempts. In adults,
anxiety and depressive symptoms may be present. Some adult males have a history of
Transvestic Fetishism as well as other Paraphilias. Associated Personality Disorders are
more common among males than among females being evaluated at adult gender clinics.
Associated laboratory findings. There is no diagnostic test specific for Gender
Identity Disorder. In the presence of a normal physical examination, karyotyping for sex
chromosomes and sex hormone assays are usually not indicated. Psychological testing
may reveal cross-gender identification or behavior patterns.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Individuals with Gender Identity Disorder have normal genitalia (in contrast to the
ambiguous genitalia or hypogonadism found in physical intersex conditions). Adolescent
and adult males with Gender Identity Disorder may show breast enlargement resulting
from hormone ingestion, hair denuding from temporary or permanent epilation, and
other physical changes as a result of procedures such as rhinoplasty or thyroid cartilage
shaving (surgical reduction of the Adam's apple). Distorted breasts or breast rashes may
be seen in females who wear breast binders. Postsurgical complications in genetic
females include prominent chest wall scars, and in genetic males, vaginal strictures,
rectovaginal fistulas, urethral stenoses, and misdirected urinary streams. Adult females
with Gender Identity Disorder may have a higher than expected likelihood of polycystic
ovarian disease.
Specific Age and Gender Features
Females with Gender Identity Disorders generally experience less ostracism because of
cross-gender interests and may suffer less from peer rejection, at least until adolescence.
In child clinic samples, there are approximately five boys for each girl referred with this
disorder. In adult clinic samples, men outnumber women by about two or three times.
In children, the referral bias toward males may partly reflect the greater stigma that
cross-gender behavior carries for boys than for girls.
Prevalence
There are no recent epidemiological studies to provide data on prevalence of Gender
Identity Disorder. Data from smaller countries in Europe with access to total population
statistics and referrals suggest that roughly 1 per 30,000 adult males and 1 per 100,000
adult females seek sex-reassignment surgery.536
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Course
For clinically referred children, onset of cross-gender interests and activities is usually
between ages 2 and 4 years, and some parents report that their child has always had
cross-gender interests. Only a very small number of children with Gender Identity
Disorder will continue to have symptoms that meet criteria for Gender Identity Disorder
in later adolescence or adulthood. Typically, children are referred around the time of
school entry because of parental concern that what they regarded as a "phase" does not
appear to be passing. Most children with Gender Identity Disorder display less overt
cross-gender behaviors with time, parental intervention, or response from peers. By late
adolescence or adulthood, about three-quarters of boys who had a childhood history of
Gender Identity Disorder report a homosexual or bisexual orientation, but without
concurrent Gender Identity Disorder. Most of the remainder report a heterosexual
orientation, also without concurrent Gender Identity Disorder. The corresponding
percentages for sexual orientation in girls are not known. Some adolescents may develop
a clearer cross-gender identification and request sex-reassignment surgery or may
continue in a chronic course of gender confusion or dysphoria.
In adult males, there are two different courses for the development of Gender
Identity Disorder. The first is a continuation of Gender Identity Disorder that had an
onset in childhood or early adolescence. These individuals typically present in late
adolescence or adulthood. In the other course, the more overt signs of cross-gender
identification appear later and more gradually, with a clinical presentation in early to
mid-adulthood usually following, but sometimes concurrent with, Transvestic Fetishism.
The later-onset group may be more fluctuating in the degree of cross-gender identifica-
tion, more ambivalent about sex-reassignment surgery, more likely to be sexually
attracted to women, and less likely to be satisfied after sex-reassignment surgery. Males
with Gender Identity Disorder who are sexually attracted to males tend to present in
adolescence or early adulthood with a lifelong history of gender dysphoria. In contrast,
those who are sexually attracted to females, to both males and females, or to neither
sex tend to present later and typically have a history of Transvestic Fetishism. If Gender
Identity Disorder is present in adulthood, it tends to have a chronic course, but
spontaneous remission has been reported.
Differential
Diagnosis
Gender Identity Disorder can be distinguished from simple nonconformity to stereo-
typical sex role behavior by the extent and pervasiveness of the cross-gender wishes,
interests, and activities. This disorder is not meant to describe a child's nonconformity
to stereotypic sex-role behavior as, for example, in "tomboyishness" in girls or "sissyish"
behavior in boys. Rather, it represents a profound disturbance of the individual's sense
of identity with regard to maleness or femaleness. Behavior in children that merely does
not fit the cultural stereotype of masculinity or femininity should not be given the
diagnosis unless the full syndrome is present, including marked distress or impairment.
Transvestic Fetishism occurs in heterosexual (or bisexual) men for whom the
cross-dressing behavior is for the purpose of sexual excitement. Aside from cross-
dressing, most individuals with Transvestic Fetishism do not have a history of childhood
cross-gender behaviors. Males with a presentation that meets full criteria for Gender
Identity Disorder as well as Transvestic Fetishism should be given both diagnoses. If
gender dysphoria is present in an individual with Transvestic Fetishism but full criteriaGender Identity Disorder
537
for Gender Identity Disorder are not met, the specifier With Gender Dysphoria can be used.
The category Gender Identity Disorder Not Otherwise Specified can be used
for individuals who have a gender identity problem with a concurrent congenital
intersex condition (e.g., androgen insensitivity syndrome or congenital adrenal
hyperplasia).
In Schizophrenia, there may rarely be delusions of belonging to the other sex.
Insistence by a person with a Gender Identity Disorder that he or she is of the other sex
is not considered a delusion, because what is invariably meant is that the person feels
like a member of the other sex rather than truly believes that he or she is a member of
the other sex. In very rare cases, however, Schizophrenia and severe Gender Identity
Disorder may coexist.
Diagnostic criteria for Gender Identity Disorder
A. A strong and persistent cross-gender identification (not merely a desire
for any perceived cultural advantages of being the other sex).
In children, the disturbance is manifested by four (or more) of the
following:
(1) repeatedly stated desire to be, or insistence that he or she is, the
other sex
(2) in boys, preference for cross-dressing or simulating female attire;
in girls, insistence on wearing only stereotypical masculine clothing
(3) strong and persistent preferences for cross-sex roles in make-
believe play or persistent fantasies of being the other sex
(4) intense desire to participate in the stereotypical games and pastimes
of the other sex
(5) strong preference for playmates of the other sex
In adolescents and adults, the disturbance is manifested by symptoms
such as a stated desire to be the other sex, frequent passing as the other
sex, desire to live or be treated as the other sex, or the conviction that
he or she has the typical feelings and reactions of the other sex.
B. Persistent discomfort with his or her sex or sense of inappropriateness
in the gender role of that sex.
In children, the disturbance is manifested by any of the following: in
boys, assertion that his penis or testes are disgusting or will disappear
or assertion that it would be better not to have a penis, or aversion
toward rough-and-tumble play and rejection of male stereotypical toys,
games, and activities; in girls, rejection of urinating in a sitting position,
assertion that she has or will grow a penis, or assertion that she does
not want to grow breasts or menstruate, or marked aversion toward
normative feminine clothing.
(continued)538
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Gender Identity Disorder (continued)
In adolescents and adults, the disturbance is manifested by symptoms
such as preoccupation with getting rid of primary and secondary sex
characteristics (e.g., request for hormones, surgery, or other procedures
to physically alter sexual characteristics to simulate the other sex) or
belief that he or she was born the wrong sex.
C. The disturbance is not concurrent with a physical intersex condition.
D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Code based on current age:
302.6 Gender Identity Disorder in Children
302.85 Gender Identity Disorder in Adolescents or Adults
Specify if (for sexually mature individuals):
Sexually Attracted to Males
Sexually Attracted to Females
Sexually Attracted to Both
Sexually Attracted to Neither
302.6 Gender Identity Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category is included for coding disorders in gender identity that are not classifiable
as a specific Gender Identity Disorder. Examples include
1. Intersex conditions (e.g., androgen insensitivity syndrome or congenital adrenal
hyperplasia) and accompanying gender dysphoria
2. Transient, stress-related cross-dressing behavior
3. Persistent preoccupation with castration or penectomy without a desire to
acquire the sex characteristics of the other sex
302.9 Sexual Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category is included for coding a sexual disturbance that does not meet the criteria
for any specific Sexual Disorder and is neither a Sexual Dysfunction nor a Paraphilia.
Examples include
1. Marked feelings of inadequacy concerning sexual performance or other traits
related to self-imposed standards of masculinity or femininity
2. Distress about a pattern of repeated sexual relationships involving a succession
of lovers who are experienced by the individual only as things to be used
3. Persistent and marked distress about sexual orientationEating Disorders
T he Eating Disorders are characterized by severe disturbances in eating behavior.
This section includes two specific diagnoses, Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia
Nervosa. Anorexia Nervosa is characterized by a refusal to maintain a minimally normal
body weight. Bulimia Nervosa is characterized by repeated episodes of binge eating
followed by inappropriate compensatory behaviors such as self-induced vomiting;
misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications; fasting; or excessive exercise. A
disturbance in perception of body shape and weight is an essential feature of both
Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa. An Eating Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
category is also provided for coding disorders that do not meet criteria for a specific
Eating Disorder.
Simple obesity is included in the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) as a
general medical condition, but does not appear in DSM-IV because it has not been
established that it is consistently associated with a psychological or behavioral syndrome.
However, when there is evidence that psychological factors are of importance in the
etiology or course of a particular case of obesity, this can be indicated by noting the
presence of Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition (p. 675).
Disorders of Feeding and Eating that are usually first diagnosed in infancy or early
childhood (i.e., Pica, Rumination Disorder, and Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early
Childhood) are included in the section "Feeding and Eating Disorders of Infancy or Early
Childhood" (p. 94).
307.1 Anorexia Nervosa
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Anorexia Nervosa are that the individual refuses to maintain a
minimally normal body weight, is intensely afraid of gaining weight, and exhibits a
significant disturbance in the perception of the shape or size of his or her body. In
addition, postmenarcheal females with this disorder are amenorrheic. (The term
anorexia is a misnomer because loss of appetite is rare.)
The individual maintains a body weight that is below a minimally normal level for
age and height (Criterion A). When Anorexia Nervosa develops in an individual during
childhood or early adolescence, there may be failure to make expected weight gains
(i.e., while growing in height) instead of weight loss.
539540
Eating Disorders
Criterion A provides a guideline for determining when the individual meets the
threshold for being underweight. It suggests that the individual weigh less than 85% of
that weight that is considered normal for that person's age and height (usually computed
using one of several published versions of the Metropolitan Life Insurance tables or
pediatric growth charts). An alternative and somewhat stricter guideline (used in the
ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Research) requires that the individual have a body mass
index (BMI) (calculated as weight in kilograms/height in meters 2 ) equal to or below
17.5 kg/m 2 . These cutoffs are provided only as suggested guidelines for the clinician,
since it is unreasonable to specify a single standard for minimally normal weight that
applies to all individuals of a given age and height. In determining a minimally normal
weight, the clinician should consider not only such guidelines but also the individual's
body build and weight history.
Usually weight loss is accomplished primarily through reduction in total food intake.
Although individuals may begin by excluding from their diet what they perceive to be
highly caloric foods, most eventually end up with a very restricted diet that is sometimes
limited to only a few foods. Additional methods of weight loss include purging (i.e.,
self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives or diuretics) and increased or excessive
exercise.
Individuals with this disorder intensely fear gaining weight or becoming fat
(Criterion B). This intense fear of becoming fat is usually not alleviated by the weight
loss. In fact, concern about weight gain often increases even as actual weight continues
to decrease.
The experience and significance of body weight and shape are distorted in these
individuals (Criterion C). Some individuals feel globally overweight. Others realize that
they are thin, but are still concerned that certain parts of their bodies, particularly the
abdomen, buttocks, and thighs, are "too fat." They may employ a wide variety of
techniques to estimate their body size or weight, including excessive weighing, obsessive
measuring of body parts, and persistently using a mirror to check for perceived areas of
"fat." The self-esteem of individuals with Anorexia Nervosa is highly dependent on their
body shape and weight. Weight loss is viewed as an impressive achievement and a sign
of extraordinary self-discipline, whereas weight gain is perceived as an unacceptable
failure of self-control. Though some individuals with this disorder may acknowledge
being thin, they typically deny the serious medical implications of their malnourished
state.
In postmenarcheal females, amenorrhea (due to abnormally low levels of estrogen
secretion that are due in turn to diminished pituitary secretion of follicle-stimulating
hormone [FSH] and luteinizing hormone [LH]) is an indicator of physiological dysfunction
in Anorexia Nervosa (Criterion D). Amenorrhea is usually a consequence of the weight
loss but, in a minority of individuals, may actually precede it. In prepubertal females,
menarche may be delayed by the illness.
The individual is often brought to professional attention by family members after
marked weight loss (or failure to make expected weight gains) has occurred. If
individuals seek help on their own, it is usually because of their subjective distress over
the somatic and psychological sequelae of starvation. It is rare for an individual with
Anorexia Nervosa to complain of weight loss per se. Individuals with Anorexia Nervosa
frequently lack insight into, or have considerable denial of, the problem and may be
unreliable historians. It is therefore often necessary to obtain information from parents
or other outside sources to evaluate the degree of weight loss and other features of the
illness.307.1 Anorexia Nervosa
541
Subtypes
The following subtypes can be used to specify the presence or absence of regular binge
eating or purging during the current episode of Anorexia Nervosa:
Restricting Type. This subtype describes presentations in which weight loss is
accomplished primarily through dieting, fasting, or excessive exercise. During
the current episode, these individuals have not regularly engaged in binge eating
or purging.
Binge-Eating/Purging Type. This subtype is used when the individual has
regularly engaged in binge eating or purging (or both) during the current episode.
Most individuals with Anorexia Nervosa who binge eat also purge through
self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas. Some
individuals included in this subtype do not binge eat, but do regularly purge after
the consumption of small amounts of food. It appears that most individuals with
Binge-Eating/Purging Type engage in these behaviors at least weekly, but
sufficient information is not available to justify the specification of a minimum
frequency.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. When seriously under-
weight, many individuals with Anorexia Nervosa manifest depressive symptoms such as
depressed mood, social withdrawal, irritability, insomnia, and diminished interest in sex.
Such individuals may have symptomatic presentations that meet criteria for Major
Depressive Disorder. Because these features are also observed in individuals without
Anorexia Nervosa who are undergoing starvation, many of the depressive features may
be secondary to the physiological sequelae of semistarvation. Symptoms of mood
disturbance must therefore be reassessed after partial or complete weight restoration.
Obsessive-compulsive features, both related and unrelated to food, are often
prominent. Most individuals with Anorexia Nervosa are preoccupied with thoughts of
food. Some collect recipes or hoard food. Observations of behaviors associated with
other forms of starvation suggest that obsessions and compulsions related to food may
be caused or exacerbated by undernutrition. When individuals with Anorexia Nervosa
exhibit obsessions and compulsions that are not related to food, body shape, or weight,
an additional diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder may be warranted.
Other features sometimes associated with Anorexia Nervosa include concerns about
eating in public, feelings of ineffectiveness, a strong need to control one's environment,
inflexible thinking, limited social spontaneity, and overly restrained initiative and
emotional expression.
Compared with individuals with Anorexia Nervosa, Restricting Type, those with the
Binge-Eating/Purging Type are more likely to have other impulse-control problems, to
abuse alcohol or other drugs, to exhibit more mood lability, and to be sexually active.
Associated laboratory findings. Although some individuals with Anorexia Nervosa
exhibit no laboratory abnormalities, the semistarvation characteristic of this disorder can
affect most major organ systems and produce a variety of disturbances. The induced
vomiting and abuse of laxatives, diuretics, and enemas can also cause a number of
disturbances leading to abnormal laboratory findings.542
Eating Disorders
Hematology: Leukopenia and mild anemia are common; thrombocytopenia occurs
rarely.
Chemistry: Dehydration may be reflected by an elevated blood urea nitrogen
(BUN). Hypercholesterolemia is common. Liver function tests may be elevated.
Hypomagnesemia, hypozincemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperamylasemia are occa-
sionally found. Induced vomiting may lead to metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum
bicarbonate), hypochloremia, and hypokalemia, and laxative abuse may cause a
metabolic acidosis. Serum thyroxine (T 4 ) levels are usually in the low-normal range;
triiodothyronine (T 3 ) levels are decreased. Hyperadrenocorticism and abnormal respon-
siveness to a variety of neuroendocrine challenges are common.
In females, low serum estrogen levels are present, whereas males have low levels
of serum testosterone. There is a regression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis
in both sexes in that the 24-hour pattern of secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH)
resembles that normally seen in prepubertal or pubertal individuals.
Electrocardiography: Sinus bradycardia and, rarely, arrhythmias are observed.
Electroencephalography: Diffuse abnormalities, reflecting a metabolic encephalop-
athy, may result from significant fluid and electrolyte disturbances.
Brain imaging: An increase in the ventricular-brain ratio secondary to starvation is
often seen.
Resting energy expenditure: This is often significantly reduced.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Many of the physical signs and symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa are attributable to
starvation. In addition to amenorrhea, there may be complaints of constipation,
abdominal pain, cold intolerance, lethargy, and excess energy. The most obvious finding
on physical examination is emaciation. There may also be significant hypotension,
hypothermia, and dryness of skin. Some individuals develop lanugo, a fine downy body
hair, on their trunks. Most individuals with Anorexia Nervosa exhibit bradycardia. Some
develop peripheral edema, especially during weight restoration or on cessation of
laxative and diuretic abuse. Rarely, petechiae, usually on the extremities, may indicate
a bleeding diathesis. Some individuals evidence a yellowing of the skin associated with
hypercarotenemia. Hypertrophy of the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands,
may be present. Individuals who induce vomiting may have dental enamel erosion and
some may have scars or calluses on the dorsum of the hand from contact with the teeth
when using the hand to induce vomiting.
The semistarvation of Anorexia Nervosa, and the purging behaviors sometimes
associated with it, can result in significant associated general medical conditions. These
include the development of normochromic normocytic anemia, impaired renal function
(associated with chronic dehydration and hypokalemia), cardiovascular problems (severe
hypotension, arrhythmias), dental problems, and osteoporosis (resulting from low calcium
intake and absorption, reduced estrogen secretion, and increased cortisol secretion).
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Anorexia Nervosa appears to be far more prevalent in industrialized societies, in which
there is an abundance of food and in which, especially for females, being considered
attractive is linked to being thin. The disorder is probably most common in the United
States, Canada, Europe, Australia, Japan, New Zealand, and South Africa, but little307.1 Anorexia Nervosa
543
systematic work has examined prevalence in other cultures. Immigrants from cultures
in which the disorder is rare who emigrate to cultures in which the disorder is more
prevalent may develop Anorexia Nervosa as thin-body ideals are assimilated. Cultural
factors may also influence the manifestations of the disorder. For example, in some
cultures, disturbed perception of the body may not be prominent and the expressed
motivation for food restriction may have a different content, such as epigastric discomfort
or distaste for food.
Anorexia Nervosa rarely begins before puberty, but there are suggestions that the
severity of associated mental disturbances may be greater among prepubertal individuals
who develop the illness. However, data also suggest that when the illness begins during
early adolescence (between ages 13 and 18 years), it may be associated with a better
prognosis. More than 90% of cases of Anorexia Nervosa occur in females.
Prevalence
Prevalence studies among females in late adolescence and early adulthood have found
rates of 0.5%-1.0% for presentations that meet full criteria for Anorexia Nervosa.
Individuals who are subthreshold for the disorder (i.e., with Eating Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified) are more commonly encountered. There are limited data concern-
ing the prevalence of this disorder in males. The incidence of Anorexia Nervosa appears
to have increased in recent decades.
Course
The mean age at onset for Anorexia Nervosa is 17 years, with some data suggesting
bimodal peaks at ages 14 and 18 years. The onset of this disorder rarely occurs in females
over age 40 years. The onset of illness is often associated with a stressful life event, such
as leaving home for college. The course and outcome of Anorexia Nervosa are highly
variable. Some individuals with Anorexia Nervosa recover fully after a single episode,
some exhibit a fluctuating pattern of weight gain followed by relapse, and others
experience a chronically deteriorating course of the illness over many years. Hospital-
ization may be required to restore weight and to address fluid and electrolyte imbalances.
Of individuals admitted to university hospitals, the long-term mortality from Anorexia
Nervosa is over 10%. Death most commonly results from starvation, suicide, or electrolyte
imbalance.
Familial Pattern
There is an increased risk of Anorexia Nervosa among first-degree biological relatives
of individuals with the disorder. An increased risk of Mood Disorders has also been
found among first-degree biological relatives of individuals with Anorexia Nervosa,
particularly relatives of individuals with the Binge-Eating/Purging Type. Studies of
Anorexia Nervosa in twins have found concordance rates for monozygotic twins to be
significantly higher than those for dizygotic twins.
Differential
Diagnosis
Other possible causes of significant weight loss should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa, especially when the presenting features are atypical544
Eating Disorders
(such as an onset of illness after age 40 years). In general medical conditions (e.g.,
gastrointestinal disease, brain tumors, occult malignancies, and acquired immunodefici-
ency syndrome [AIDS]), serious weight loss may occur, but individuals with such
disorders usually do not have a distorted body image and a desire for further weight
loss. The superior mesenteric artery syndrome (characterized by postprandial
vomiting secondary to intermittent gastric outlet obstruction) should be distinguished
from Anorexia Nervosa, although this syndrome may sometimes develop in individuals
with Anorexia Nervosa because of their emaciation. In Major Depressive Disorder,
severe weight loss may occur, but most individuals with Major Depressive Disorder do
not have a desire for excessive weight loss or excessive fear of gaining weight. In
Schizophrenia, individuals may exhibit odd eating behavior and occasionally experi-
ence significant weight loss, but they rarely show the fear of gaining weight and the
body image disturbance required for a diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa.
Some of the features of Anorexia Nervosa are part of the criteria sets for Social
Phobia, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, and Body Dysmorphic Disorder. Spe-
cifically, individuals may be humiliated or embarrassed to be seen eating in public, as
in Social Phobia; may exhibit obsessions and compulsions related to food, as in
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder; or may be preoccupied with an imagined defect in
bodily appearance, as in Body Dysmorphic Disorder. If the individual with Anorexia
Nervosa has social fears that are limited to eating behavior alone, the diagnosis of Social
Phobia should not be made, but social fears unrelated to eating behavior (e.g., excessive
fear of speaking in public) may warrant an additional diagnosis of Social Phobia.
Similarly, an additional diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder should be consid-
ered only if the individual exhibits obsessions and compulsions unrelated to food (e.g.,
an excessive fear of contamination), and an additional diagnosis of Body Dysmorphic
Disorder should be considered only if the distortion is unrelated to body shape and size
(e.g., preoccupation that one's nose is too big).
In Bulimia Nervosa, individuals exhibit recurrent episodes of binge eating, engage
in inappropriate behavior to avoid weight gain (e.g., self-induced vomiting), and are
overly concerned with body shape and weight. However, unlike individuals with
Anorexia Nervosa, Binge-Eating/Purging Type, individuals with Bulimia Nervosa are
able to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal level.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.1 Anorexia Nervosa
A. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight
for age and height (e.g., weight loss leading to maintenance of body
weight less than 85% of that expected; or failure to make expected
weight gain during period of growth, leading to body weight less than
85% of that expected).
B. Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, even though under-
weight.
(continued)307.51 Bulimia Nervosa
545
D Diagnostic criteria for 307.1 Anorexia Nervosa (continued)
C. Disturbance in the way in which one's body weight or shape is
experienced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-
evaluation, or denial of the seriousness of the current low body weight.
D. In postmenarcheal females, amenorrhea, i.e., the absence of at least
three consecutive menstrual cycles. (A woman is considered to have
amenorrhea if her periods occur only following hormone, e.g., estrogen,
administration.)
Specify type:
Restricting Type: during the current episode of Anorexia Nervosa, the
person has not regularly engaged in binge-eating or purging behavior
(i.e., self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas)
Binge-Eating/Purging Type: during the current episode of Anorexia
Nervosa, the person has regularly engaged in binge-eating or purging
behavior (i.e., self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics,
or enemas)
307.51 Bulimia Nervosa
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Bulimia Nervosa are binge eating and inappropriate compen-
satory methods to prevent weight gain. In addition, the self-evaluation of individuals
with Bulimia Nervosa is excessively influenced by body shape and weight. To qualify
for the diagnosis, the binge eating and the inappropriate compensatory behaviors must
occur, on average, at least twice a week for 3 months (Criterion C).
A binge is defined as eating in a discrete period of time an amount of food that is
definitely larger than most individuals would eat under similar circumstances (Criterion
Al). The clinician should consider the context in which the eating occurred—what would
be regarded as excessive consumption at a typical meal might be considered normal
during a celebration or holiday meal. A "discrete period of time" refers to a limited
period, usually less than 2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be restricted
to one setting. For example, an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and then
continue it on returning home. Continual snacking on small amounts of food throughout
the day would not be considered a binge.
Although the type of food consumed during binges varies, it typically includes sweet,
high-calorie foods such as ice cream or cake. However, binge eating appears to be
characterized more by an abnormality in the amount of food consumed than by a craving
for a specific nutrient, such as carbohydrate. Although individuals with Bulimia Nervosa
consume more calories during an episode of binge eating than persons without Bulimia
Nervosa consume during a meal, the fractions of calories derived from protein, fat, and
carbohydrate are similar.546
Eating Disorders
Individuals with Bulimia Nervosa are typically ashamed of their eating problems
and attempt to conceal their symptoms. Binge eating usually occurs in secrecy, or as
inconspicuously as possible. An episode may or may not be planned in advance and is
usually (but not always) characterized by rapid consumption. The binge eating often
continues until the individual is uncomfortably, or even painfully, full. Binge eating is
typically triggered by dysphoric mood states, interpersonal stressors, intense hunger
following dietary restraint, or feelings related to body weight, body shape, and food.
Binge eating may transiently reduce dysphoria, but disparaging self-criticism and
depressed mood often follow.
An episode of binge eating is also accompanied by a sense of lack of control
(Criterion A2). An individual may be in a frenzied state while binge eating, especially
early in the course of the disorder. Some individuals describe a dissociative quality
during, or following, the binge episodes. After Bulimia Nervosa has persisted for some
time, individuals may report that their binge-eating episodes are no longer characterized
by an acute feeling of loss of control, but rather by behavioral indicators of impaired
control, such as difficulty resisting binge eating or difficulty stopping a binge once it has
begun. The impairment in control associated with binge eating in Bulimia Nervosa is
not absolute; for example, an individual may continue binge eating while the telephone
is ringing, but will cease if a roommate or spouse unexpectedly enters the room.
Another essential feature of Bulimia Nervosa is the recurrent use of inappropriate
compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain (Criterion B). Many individuals with
Bulimia Nervosa employ several methods in their attempt to compensate for binge eating.
The most common compensatory technique is the induction of vomiting after an episode
of binge eating. This method of purging is employed by 80%-90% of individuals with
Bulimia Nervosa who present for treatment at eating disorders clinics. The immediate
effects of vomiting include relief from physical discomfort and reduction of fear of
gaining weight. In some cases, vomiting becomes a goal in itself, and the person will
binge in order to vomit or will vomit after eating a small amount of food. Individuals
with Bulimia Nervosa may use a variety of methods to induce vomiting, including the
use of fingers or instruments to stimulate the gag reflex. Individuals generally become
adept at inducing vomiting and are eventually able to vomit at will. Rarely, individuals
consume syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting. Other purging behaviors include the misuse
of laxatives and diuretics. Approximately one-third of those with Bulimia Nervosa misuse
laxatives after binge eating. Rarely, individuals with the disorder will misuse enemas
following episodes of binge eating, but this is seldom the sole compensatory method
employed.
Individuals with Bulimia Nervosa may fast for a day or more or exercise excessively
in an attempt to compensate for binge eating. Exercise may be considered to be excessive
when it significantly interferes with important activities, when it occurs at inappropriate
times or in inappropriate settings, or when the individual continues to exercise despite
injury or other medical complications. Rarely, individuals with this disorder may take
thyroid hormone in an attempt to avoid weight gain. Individuals with diabetes mellitus
and Bulimia Nervosa may omit or reduce insulin doses in order to reduce the metabolism
of food consumed during eating binges.
Individuals with Bulimia Nervosa place an excessive emphasis on body shape and
weight in their self-evaluation, and these factors are typically the most important ones
in determining self-esteem (Criterion D). Individuals with this disorder may closely
resemble those with Anorexia Nervosa in their fear of gaining weight, in their desire to
lose weight, and in the level of dissatisfaction with their bodies. However, a diagnosis307.51 Bulimia Nervosa
547
of Bulimia Nervosa should not be given when the disturbance occurs only during
episodes of Anorexia Nervosa (Criterion E).
Subtypes
The following subtypes can be used to specify the presence or absence of regular use
of purging methods as a means to compensate for the binge eating:
Purging Type. This subtype describes presentations in which the person has
regularly engaged in self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics,
or enemas during the current episode.
Nonpurging Type. This subtype describes presentations in which the person
has used other inappropriate compensatory behaviors, such as fasting or exces-
sive exercise, but has not regularly engaged in self-induced vomiting or the misuse
of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas during the current episode.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Individuals with Bulimia
Nervosa typically are within the normal weight range, although some may be slightly
underweight or overweight. The disorder occurs but is uncommon among moderately
and morbidly obese individuals. There are suggestions that, prior to the onset of the
Eating Disorder, individuals with Bulimia Nervosa are more likely to be overweight than
their peers. Between binges, individuals with Bulimia Nervosa typically restrict their total
caloric consumption and preferentially select low-calorie ("diet") foods while avoiding
foods they perceive to be fattening or likely to trigger a binge.
There is an increased frequency of depressive symptoms (e.g., low self-esteem) or
Mood Disorders (particularly Dysthymic Disorder and Major Depressive Disorder) in
individuals with Bulimia Nervosa. In many or most individuals, the mood disturbance
begins at the same time as or following the development of Bulimia Nervosa, and
individuals often ascribe their mood disturbances to Bulimia Nervosa. However, in some
individuals, the mood disturbance clearly precedes the development of Bulimia Nervosa.
There may also be an increased frequency of anxiety symptoms (e.g., fear of social
situations) or Anxiety Disorders. These mood and anxiety disturbances frequently remit
following effective treatment of Bulimia Nervosa. Substance Abuse or Dependence,
particularly involving alcohol and stimulants, occurs in about one-third of individuals
with Bulimia Nervosa. Stimulant use often begins in an attempt to control appetite and
weight. Probably between one-third and one-half of individuals with Bulimia Nervosa
also have personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality Disorders
(most frequently Borderline Personality Disorder).
Preliminary evidence suggests that individuals with Bulimia Nervosa, Purging Type,
show more symptoms of depression and greater concern with shape and weight than
individuals with Bulimia Nervosa, Nonpurging Type.
Associated laboratory findings. Frequent purging behavior of any kind can pro-
duce fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, most frequently hypokalemia, hyponatremia,
and hypochloremia. The loss of stomach acid through vomiting may produce a metabolic
alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate), and the frequent induction of diarrhea through
laxative abuse can cause metabolic acidosis. Some individuals with Bulimia Nervosa548
Eating Disorders
exhibit mildly elevated levels of serum amylase, probably reflecting an increase in the
salivary isoenzyme.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Recurrent vomiting eventually leads to a significant and permanent loss of dental enamel,
especially from lingual surfaces of the front teeth. These teeth may become chipped and
appear ragged and "moth-eaten." There may also be an increased frequency of dental
cavities. In some individuals, the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, may
become notably enlarged. Individuals who induce vomiting by manually stimulating the
gag reflex may develop calluses or scars on the dorsal surface of the hand from repeated
trauma from the teeth. Serious cardiac and skeletal myopathies have been reported
among individuals who regularly use syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting.
Menstrual irregularity or amenorrhea sometimes occurs among females with Bulimia
Nervosa; whether such disturbances are related to weight fluctuations, to nutritional
deficiencies, or to emotional stress is uncertain. Individuals who chronically abuse
laxatives may become dependent on their use to stimulate bowel movements. The fluid
and electrolyte disturbances resulting from the purging behavior are sometimes suffi-
ciently severe to constitute medically serious problems. Rare but potentially fatal
complications include esophageal tears, gastric rupture, and cardiac arrhythmias.
Compared with individuals with Bulimia Nervosa, Nonpurging Type, those with the
Purging Type are much more likely to have physical problems such as fluid and
electrolyte disturbances.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Bulimia Nervosa has been reported to occur with roughly similar frequencies in most
industrialized countries, including the United States, Canada, Europe, Australia, Japan,
New Zealand, and South Africa. Few studies have examined the prevalence of Bulimia
Nervosa in other cultures. In clinical studies of Bulimia Nervosa in the United States,
individuals presenting with this disorder are primarily white, but the disorder has also
been reported among other ethnic groups.
In clinic and population samples, at least 90% of individuals with Bulimia Nervosa
are female. Some data suggest that males with Bulimia Nervosa have a higher prevalence
of premorbid obesity than do females with Bulimia Nervosa.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Bulimia Nervosa among adolescent and young adult females is
approximately l%-3%; the rate of occurrence of this disorder in males is approximately
one-tenth of that in females.
Course
Bulimia Nervosa usually begins in late adolescence or early adult life. The binge eating
frequently begins during or after an episode of dieting. Disturbed eating behavior persists
for at least several years in a high percentage of clinic samples. The course may be
chronic or intermittent, with periods of remission alternating with recurrences of binge
eating. The long-term outcome of Bulimia Nervosa is not known.307.51 Bulimia Nervosa
549
Familial Pattern
Several studies have suggested an increased frequency of Bulimia Nervosa, of Mood
Disorders, and of Substance Abuse and Dependence in the first-degree biological
relatives of individuals with Bulimia Nervosa. A familial tendency toward obesity may
exist, but this has not been definitively established.
Differential
Diagnosis
Individuals whose binge-eating behavior occurs only during Anorexia Nervosa are given
the diagnosis Anorexia Nervosa, Binge-Eating/Purging Type, and should not be
given the additional diagnosis of Bulimia Nervosa. For an individual who binges and
purges but whose presentation no longer meets the full criteria for Anorexia Nervosa,
Binge-Eating/Purging Type (e.g., when weight is normal or menses have become
regular), it is a matter of clinical judgment whether the most appropriate current diagnosis
is Anorexia Nervosa, Binge-Eating/Purging Type, In Partial Remission, or Bulimia
Nervosa.
In certain neurological or other general medical conditions, such as Kleine-Levin
syndrome, there is disturbed eating behavior, but the characteristic psychological
features of Bulimia Nervosa, such as overconcern with body shape and weight, are not
present. Overeating is common in Major Depressive Disorder, With Atypical
Features, but such individuals do not engage in inappropriate compensatory behavior
and do not exhibit the characteristic overconcern with body shape and weight. If criteria
for both disorders are met, both diagnoses should be given. Binge-eating behavior is
included in the impulsive behavior criterion that is part of the definition of Borderline
Personality Disorder. If the full criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses can
be given.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.51 Bulimia Nervosa
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is
characterized by both of the following:
(1) eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period),
an amount of food that is definitely larger than most people would
eat during a similar period of time and under similar circumstances
(2) a sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a
feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how much
one is eating)
B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behavior in order to prevent
weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuretics,
enemas, or other medications; fasting; or excessive exercise.
C. The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur,
on average, at least twice a week for 3 months.
(continued)550
Eating Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 307.51 Bulimia Nervosa (continued)
D. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight.
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of Anorexia
Nervosa.
Specify type:
Purging Type: during the current episode of Bulimia Nervosa, the person
has regularly engaged in self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives,
diuretics, or enemas
Nonpurging Type: during the current episode of Bulimia Nervosa, the
person has used other inappropriate compensatory behaviors, such as
fasting or excessive exercise, but has not regularly engaged in self-induced
vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas
307.50 Eating Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
The Eating Disorder Not Otherwise Specified category is for disorders of eating that do
not meet the criteria for any specific Eating Disorder. Examples include
1. For females, all of the criteria for Anorexia Nervosa are met except that the
individual has regular menses.
2. All of the criteria for Anorexia Nervosa are met except that, despite significant
weight loss, the individual's current weight is in the normal range.
3. All of the criteria for Bulimia Nervosa are met except that the binge eating and
inappropriate compensatory mechanisms occur at a frequency of less than twice
a week or for a duration of less than 3 months.
4. The regular use of inappropriate compensatory behavior by an individual of
normal body weight after eating small amounts of food (e.g., self-induced
vomiting after the consumption of two cookies).
5. Repeatedly chewing and spitting out, but not swallowing, large amounts of food.
6. Binge-eating disorder: recurrent episodes of binge eating in the absence of the
regular use of inappropriate compensatory behaviors characteristic of Bulimia
Nervosa (see p. 729 for suggested criteria).Sleep Disorders
T
he sleep disorders are organized into four major sections according to presumed
etiology. Primary Sleep Disorders are those in which none of the etiologies listed
below (i.e., another mental disorder, a general medical condition, or a substance) is
responsible. Primary Sleep Disorders are presumed to arise from endogenous abnormal-
ities in sleep-wake generating or timing mechanisms, often complicated by conditioning
factors. Primary Sleep Disorders in turn are subdivided into Dyssomnias (characterized
by abnormalities in the amount, quality, or timing of sleep) and Parasomnias
(characterized by abnormal behavioral or physiological events occurring in association
with sleep, specific sleep stages, or sleep-wake transitions).
Sleep Disorder Related to Another Mental Disorder involves a prominent
complaint of sleep disturbance that results from a diagnosable mental disorder (often a
Mood Disorder or Anxiety Disorder) but that is sufficiently severe to warrant independent
clinical attention. Presumably, the pathophysiological mechanisms responsible for the
mental disorder also affect sleep-wake regulation.
Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition involves a prominent
complaint of sleep disturbance that results from the direct physiological effects of a
general medical condition on the sleep-wake system.
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder involves prominent complaints of sleep
disturbance that result from the concurrent use, or recent discontinuation of use, of a
substance (including medications).
The systematic assessment in individuals who present with prominent complaints
of sleep disturbance includes an evaluation of the specific type of sleep complaint and
a consideration of concurrent mental disorders, general medical conditions, and
substance (including medication) use that may be responsible for the sleep distur-
bance.
Five distinct sleep stages can be measured by polysomnography: rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep and four stages of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep
(stages 1, 2, 3, and 4). Stage 1 NREM sleep is a transition from wakefulness to sleep and
occupies about 5% of time spent asleep in healthy adults. Stage 2 NREM sleep, which
is characterized by specific EEG waveforms (sleep spindles and K complexes), occupies
about 50% of time spent asleep. Stages 3 and 4 NREM sleep (also known collectively as
slow-wave sleep) are the deepest levels of sleep and occupy about 10%-20% of sleep
551552
Sleep Disorders
time. REM sleep, during which the majority of typical storylike dreams occur, occupies
about 20%-25% of total sleep.
These sleep stages have a characteristic temporal organization across the night.
NREM stages 3 and 4 tend to occur in the first one-third to one-half of the night and
increase in duration in response to sleep deprivation. REM sleep occurs cyclically
throughout the night, alternating with NREM sleep about every 80-100 minutes. RE
sleep periods increase in duration toward the morning. Human sleep also varies
characteristically across the life span. After relative stability with large amounts of
slow-wave sleep in childhood and early adolescence, sleep continuity and depth
deteriorate across the adult age range. This deterioration is reflected by increased
wakefulness and stage 1 sleep and decreased stages 3 and 4 sleep. Because of this, age
must be considered in the diagnosis of a Sleep Disorder in any individual.
Polysomnography is the monitoring of multiple electrophysiological parameters
during sleep and generally includes measurement of EEG activity, electrooculographic
activity, and electromyographic activity. Additional polysomnographic measures may
include oral or nasal airflow, respiratory effort, chest and abdominal wall movement,
oxyhemoglobin saturation, or exhaled carbon dioxide concentration; these measures are
used to monitor respiration during sleep and to detect the presence and severity of sleep
apnea. Measurement of peripheral electromyographic activity may be used to detect
abnormal movements during sleep. Most polysomnographic studies are conducted
during the person's usual sleeping hours—that is, at night. However, daytime poly-
somnographic studies also are used to quantify daytime sleepiness. The most common
daytime procedure is the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT), in which the individual is
instructed to lie down in a dark room and not resist falling asleep; this protocol is repeated
five times during the day. Sleep latency (the amount of time required to fall asleep) is
measured on each trial and is used as an index of physiological sleepiness. The converse
of the MSLT is also used: In the Repeated Test of Sustained Wakefulness (RTSW), the
individual is placed in a quiet, dimly lit room and instructed to remain awake; this
protocol is repeated several times during the day. Again, sleep latency is measured, but
it is used here as an index of the individual's ability to maintain wakefulness.
Standard terminology for polysomnographic measures is used throughout the text
in this section. Sleep continuity refers to the overall balance of sleep and wakefulness
during a night of sleep. "Better" sleep continuity indicates consolidated sleep with little
wakefulness; "worse" sleep continuity indicates disrupted sleep with more wakefulness.
Specific sleep continuity measures include sleep latency—the amount of time required
to fall asleep (expressed in minutes); intermittent wakefulness—the amount of awake
time after initial sleep onset (expressed in minutes); and sleep efficiency—the ratio of
actual time spent asleep to time spent in bed (expressed as a percentage, with higher
numbers indicating better sleep continuity). Sleep architecture refers to the amount and
distribution of specific sleep stages. Sleep architecture measures include absolute
amounts of REM sleep and each NREM sleep stage (in minutes), relative amount of REM
sleep and NREM sleep stages (expressed as a percentage of total sleep time), and latency
between sleep onset and the first REM period (REM latency).
The text for each of the Sleep Disorders contains a section describing its relationship
to corresponding disorders in the The International Classification of Sleep Disorders:
(ICSD) Diagnostic and Coding Manual, published in 1990 by the American Sleep
Disorders Association.307.42 Primary Insomnia
553
Primary Sleep Disorders
Dyssomnias
Dyssomnias are primary disorders of initiating or maintaining sleep or of excessive
sleepiness and are characterized by a disturbance in the amount, quality, or timing of
sleep. This section includes Primary Insomnia, Primary Hypersomnia, Narcolepsy,
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder, and Dyssomnia Not
Otherwise Specified.
307.42 Primary Insomnia
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Primary Insomnia is a complaint of difficulty initiating or
maintaining sleep or of nonrestorative sleep that lasts for at least 1 month (Criterion A)
and causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion B). The disturbance in sleep does not occur
exclusively during the course of another sleep disorder (Criterion C) or mental disorder
(Criterion D) and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general
medical condition (Criterion E).
Individuals with Primary Insomnia most often report a combination of difficulty
falling asleep and intermittent wakefulness during sleep. Less commonly, these individ-
uals may complain only of nonrestorative sleep, that is, feeling that their sleep was
restless, light, or of poor quality. Primary Insomnia is often associated with increased
physiological or psychological arousal at nighttime in combination with negative
conditioning for sleep. A marked preoccupation with and distress due to the inability
to sleep may contribute to the development of a vicious cycle: the more the individual
strives to sleep, the more frustrated and distressed the individual becomes and the less
he or she is able to sleep. Lying in a bed in which the individual has frequently spent
sleepless nights may cause frustration and conditioned arousal. Conversely, the individ-
ual may fall asleep more easily when not trying to do so (e.g., while watching television,
reading, or riding in a car). Some individuals with increased arousal and negative
conditioning report that they sleep better away from their own bedrooms and their usual
routines. Chronic insomnia may lead to decreased feelings of well-being during the day
(e.g., deterioration of mood and motivation; decreased attention, energy, and concen-
tration; and an increase in fatigue and malaise). Although individuals often have the
subjective complaint of daytime fatigue, polysomnographic studies usually do not
demonstrate an increase in physiological signs of sleepiness.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Many individuals with Pri-
mary Insomnia have a history of "light" or easily disturbed sleep prior to the development
of more persistent sleep problems. Other associated factors may include anxious
overconcern with general health and increased sensitivity to the daytime effects of mild
sleep loss. Symptoms of anxiety or depression that do not meet criteria for a specific554
Sleep Disorders
mental disorder may be present. Interpersonal, social, and occupational problems may
develop as a result of overconcern with sleep, increased daytime irritability, and poor
concentration. Problems with inattention and concentration may also lead to accidents.
Individuals with Primary Insomnia may have a history of mental disorders, particularly
Mood Disorders and Anxiety Disorders. Conversely, the chronic sleep disturbance that
characterizes Primary Insomnia constitutes a risk factor for (or perhaps an early symptom
of) subsequent Mood Disorders and Anxiety Disorders. Individuals with Primary
Insomnia sometimes use medications inappropriately: hypnotics or alcohol to help with
nighttime sleep, anxiolytics to combat tension or anxiety, and caffeine or other stimulants
to combat excessive fatigue. In some cases, this type of substance use may progress to
Substance Abuse or Substance Dependence.
Associated laboratory findings. Polysomnography may demonstrate poor sleep
continuity (e.g., increased sleep latency, increased intermittent wakefulness, and de-
creased sleep efficiency), increased stage 1 sleep, decreased stages 3 and 4 sleep,
increased muscle tension, or increased amounts of EEG alpha activity during sleep. These
features must be interpreted within the context of age-appropriate norms. Some
individuals may report better sleep in the laboratory than at home, suggesting a
conditioned basis for sleep complaints. Other psychophysiological tests may also show
high arousal (e.g., increased muscle tension or excessive physiological reactivity to
stress). Individuals with Primary Insomnia may also have elevated scores on self-report
psychological or personality inventories (e.g., on profiles indicating chronic, mild
depression and anxiety; an "internalizing" style of conflict resolution; and a somatic
focus).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Individuals with Primary Insomnia may appear fatigued or haggard, but show no other
characteristic abnormalities on physical examination. There may be an increased
incidence of stress-related psychophysiological problems (e.g., tension headache,
increased muscle tension, gastric distress).
Specific Age and Gender Features
Survey data consistently demonstrate that complaints of insomnia are more prevalent
with increasing age and among women. Young adults more often complain of difficulty
falling asleep, whereas midlife and elderly adults are more likely to have difficulty with
maintaining sleep and early morning awakening. Paradoxically, despite the greater
prevalence of insomnia complaints among elderly women, polysomnographic studies
generally indicate better preservation of sleep continuity and slow-wave sleep in elderly
females than in elderly males. The reason for this discrepancy between self-report and
laboratory data is not known.
Prevalence
The true prevalence rate of Primary Insomnia in the general population is unknown.
Population surveys indicate a 1-year prevalence of insomnia complaints of 30%-40% in
adults (although the percentage of those whose sleep disturbance would meet criteria
for Primary Insomnia has not been studied). In clinics specializing in sleep disorders,307.42 Primary Insomnia
555
approximately 15%-25% of individuals with chronic insomnia are diagnosed with
Primary Insomnia.
Course
The factors that precipitate Primary Insomnia may differ from those that perpetuate it.
Most cases have a fairly sudden onset at a time of psychological, social, or medical stress.
Primary Insomnia often persists long after the original causative factors resolve, due to
the development of heightened arousal and negative conditioning. For example, a
person with a painful injury who spends a great deal of time in bed and has difficulty
sleeping may then develop negative associations for sleep. Negative associations,
increased arousal, and conditioned awakenings may then persist beyond the convales-
cent period, leading to Primary Insomnia. A similar scenario may develop in association
with insomnia that occurs in the context of an acute psychological stress or a mental
disorder. For instance, insomnia that occurs during an episode of Major Depressive
Disorder can become a focus of attention with consequent negative conditioning, and
insomnia may persist long after resolution of the depressive episode. In some cases,
Primary Insomnia may develop gradually without a clear stressor.
Primary Insomnia typically begins in young adulthood or middle age and is rare in
childhood or adolescence. In exceptional cases, the insomnia can be documented back
to childhood. The course of Primary Insomnia is variable. It may be limited to a period
of several months, particularly if precipitated by a psychosocial or medical stressor that
later resolves. The more typical course consists of an initial phase of progressive
worsening over weeks to months, followed by a chronic phase of stable sleep difficulty
that may last for many years. Some individuals experience an episodic course, with
periods of better or worse sleep occurring in response to life events such as vacations
or stress.
Familial Pattern
The predisposition toward light and disrupted sleep has a familial association. Formal
genetic and/or family studies have not been conducted.
Differential
Diagnosis
"Normal" sleep duration varies considerably in the general population. Some individuals
who require little sleep ("short sleepers") may be concerned about their sleep duration.
Short sleepers are distinguished from those with Primary Insomnia by their lack of
difficulty falling asleep and by the absence of characteristic symptoms of Primary
Insomnia (e.g., intermittent wakefulness, fatigue, concentration problems, or irritability).
Daytime sleepiness, which is a characteristic feature of Primary Hypersomnia,
can also occur in Primary Insomnia, but is not as severe in Primary Insomnia. When
daytime sleepiness is judged to be due to insomnia, an additional diagnosis of Primary
Hypersomnia is not given.
Jet Lag and Shift Work Types of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder are distin-
guished from Primary Insomnia by the history of recent transmeridian travel or shift
work. Individuals with the Delayed Sleep Phase Type of Circadian Rhythm Sleep
Disorder report sleep-onset insomnia only when they try to sleep at socially normal556
Sleep Disorders
times, but they do not report difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep when they sleep
at their preferred times.
Narcolepsy may cause insomnia complaints, particularly in older adults. However,
Narcolepsy rarely involves a major complaint of insomnia and is distinguished from
Primary Insomnia by symptoms of prominent daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, sleep
paralysis, and sleep-related hallucinations.
A Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, particularly central sleep apnea, may involve
a complaint of chronic insomnia and daytime impairment. A careful history may reveal
periodic pauses in breathing during sleep or crescendo-decrescendo breathing (Cheyne-
Stokes respiration). A history of central nervous system injury or disease may further
suggest a Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. Polysomnography can confirm the presenc
of apneic events. Most individuals with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder have obstruc
tive apnea that can be distinguished from Primary Insomnia by a history of loud snoring,
breathing pauses during sleep, and excessive daytime sleepiness.
Parasomnias are characterized by a complaint of unusual behavior or events during
sleep that sometimes may lead to intermittent awakenings. However, it is these
behavioral events that dominate the clinical picture in a Parasomnia rather than the
insomnia.
Primary Insomnia must be distinguished from mental disorders that include
insomnia as an essential or associated feature (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder,
Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Schizophrenia). The diagnosis of Primary Insomnia is not
given if insomnia occurs exclusively during the course of another mental disorder.
A thorough investigation for the presence of other mental disorders is essential before
considering the diagnosis of Primary Insomnia. A diagnosis of Primary Insomnia can be
made in the presence of another current or past mental disorder if the mental disorder
is judged to not account for the insomnia or if the insomnia and the mental disorder
have an independent course. In contrast, when insomnia occurs as a manifestation of,
and exclusively during the course of, another mental disorder (e.g., a Mood, Anxiety,
Somatoform, or Psychotic Disorder), the diagnosis of Insomnia Related to Another
Mental Disorder may be more appropriate. This diagnosis should only be considered
when the insomnia is the predominant complaint and is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention; otherwise, no separate diagnosis is necessary.
Primary Insomnia must be distinguished from Sleep Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition, Insomnia Type. The diagnosis should be Sleep Disorder Due to
a General Medical Condition when the insomnia is judged to be the direct physiological
consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., pheochromocytoma, hyper-
thyroidism) (see p. 597). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination. Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder, Insomnia Type, is distin-
guished from Primary Insomnia by the fact that a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a
medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the insomnia
(see p. 601). For example, insomnia occurring only in the context of heavy coffee
consumption would be diagnosed as Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder, Insomnia Type,
With Onset During Intoxication.
Relationship to International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
Primary Insomnia subsumes a number of insomnia diagnoses in the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD), including Psychophysiological Insomnia, Sleep307.44 Primary Hypersomnia
557
State Misperception, Idiopathic Insomnia, and some cases of Inadequate Sleep Hygiene.
Psychophysiological Insomnia most closely resembles Primary Insomnia, particularly in
terms of arousal and conditioning factors. Sleep State Misperception is a condition
characterized by complaints of insomnia with a marked discrepancy between subjective
and objective estimates of sleep. Idiopathic Insomnia includes those cases with onset in
childhood and a lifelong course, presumably due to an abnormality in the neurological
control of the sleep-wake system. Inadequate Sleep Hygiene refers to insomnia resulting
from behavioral practices that increase arousal or disrupt sleep organization (e.g.,
working late into the night, taking excessive daytime naps, or keeping irregular sleep
hours).
Diagnostic criteria for 307.42 Primary Insomnia
A. The predominant complaint is difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep,
or nonrestorative sleep, for at least 1 month.
B. The sleep disturbance (or associated daytime fatigue) causes clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning.
C. The sleep disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of
Narcolepsy, Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, Circadian Rhythm Sleep
Disorder, or a Parasomnia.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of another
mental disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Generalized Anxiety
Disorder, a delirium).
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
307.44 Primary Hypersomnia
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Primary Hypersomnia is excessive sleepiness for at least 1 month
as evidenced either by prolonged sleep episodes or by daytime sleep episodes occurring
almost daily (Criterion A). The excessive sleepiness must be sufficiently severe to cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning (Criterion B). The excessive sleepiness does not occur exclusively
during the course of another Sleep Disorder (Criterion C) or mental disorder (Criterion
D) and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical
condition (Criterion E).558
Sleep Disorders
In individuals with Primary Hypersomnia, the duration of the major sleep episode
(for most individuals, nocturnal sleep) may range from 8 to 12 hours and is often followed
by difficulty awakening in the morning. The actual quality of nocturnal sleep is normal.
Excessive sleepiness during normal waking hours takes the form of intentional naps or
inadvertent episodes of sleep. Objective measurements demonstrate increased physio-
logical sleepiness. Daytime naps tend to be relatively long (often lasting an hour or
more), are experienced as unrefreshing, and often do not lead to improved alertness.
Individuals typically feel sleepiness developing over a period of time, rather than
experiencing a sudden sleep "attack." Unintentional sleep episodes typically occur in
low-stimulation and low-activity situations (e.g., while attending lectures, reading,
watching television, or driving long distances).
Hypersomnia can lead to significant distress and dysfunction in work and social
relationships. Prolonged nocturnal sleep and difficulty awakening can result in difficulty
in meeting morning obligations. Unintentional daytime sleep episodes can be embar-
rassing and even dangerous, if, for instance, the individual is driving or operating
machinery when the episode occurs. The low level of alertness that occurs while an
individual fights sleepiness can lead to poor efficiency, poor concentration, and poor
memory during daytime activities. Sleepiness, often misattributed to boredom or laziness,
can also disrupt social and family relationships.
Specifier
Recurrent. This specifier is used if there are periods of excessive sleepiness
that last at least 3 days occurring several times a year for at least 2 years.
Most individuals with Primary Hypersomnia have consistent and persistent symp-
toms. In contrast, the Recurrent form should be noted if symptoms occur periodically
for several days to several weeks, with symptomatic periods recurring several times per
year. Between periods of excessive sleepiness, sleep duration and daytime alertness are
normal. In the recurrent form of Primary Hypersomnia known as Kleine-Levin syndrome,
individuals may spend 18-20 hours asleep or in bed. The recurrent periods of sleepiness
are associated with other characteristic clinical features indicating disinhibition. Indis-
criminate hypersexuality including inappropriate sexual advances and overt masturba-
tion can be seen in males (and less often in females). Compulsive overeating with acute
weight gain may occur. Irritability, depersonalization, depression, confusion, and
occasional hallucinations have been described in some individuals, and impulsive
behaviors can also occur. Other recurrent forms of hypersomnia can be seen in the
absence of these features. For instance, some females report regularly occurring periods
of hypersomnia at specific times of their menstrual cycle.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. In Primary Hypersomnia,
sleep tends to be continuous but nonrestorative. Individuals with this disorder fall asleep
quickly and have good sleep efficiency, but may have difficulty waking up in the
morning, sometimes appearing confused, combative, or ataxic. This prolonged impair-
ment of alertness at the sleep-wake transition is often referred to as "sleep drunkenness."
Persistent daytime sleepiness can lead to automatic behavior (usually of a very307.44 Primary Hypersomnia
559
routine, low-complexity type) that the individual carries out with little or no subsequent
recall. For example, individuals may find themselves having driven several miles from
where they thought they were, unaware of the "automatic" driving they did in the
preceding minutes.
Although precise data are not available regarding comorbidity with mental disorders,
many individuals with Primary Hypersomnia have symptoms of depression that may
meet criteria for Major Depressive Disorder. This may be related to the psychosocial
consequences of excessive sleepiness. Individuals with hypersomnia are also at risk for
Substance-Related Disorders, particularly related to self-medication with stimulants.
Associated laboratory findings. In Primary Hypersomnia, nocturnal polysomnog-
raphy demonstrates a normal to prolonged sleep duration, short sleep latency, normal
to increased sleep continuity, and normal distributions of rapid eye movement (REM)
and non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. Some individuals with this disorder may
have increased amounts of slow-wave sleep. Sleep-onset REM periods (the occurrence
of REM sleep within 20 minutes of sleep onset), breathing-related sleep disturbances,
and frequent limb movements disrupting sleep are not present. The Multiple Sleep
Latency Test (MSLT) documents excessive physiological daytime sleepiness, typically
indicated by mean sleep latency values of 5-10 minutes. REM sleep does not occur
during the daytime sleep episodes. Nocturnal polysomnography and the MSLT do not
reveal findings characteristic of other causes of hypersomnia.
In the Recurrent Kleine-Levin form of Primary Hypersomnia, routine EEC studies
performed during the periods of hypersomnia show general slowing of the background
rhythm and paroxysmal bursts of theta activity. Nocturnal polysomnography shows an
increase in total sleep time and short REM sleep latency. MSLT studies confirm increased
physiological sleepiness, with sleep latencies generally less than 10 minutes. Sleep-onset
REM periods may be seen during symptomatic periods.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Individuals with Primary Hypersomnia often appear sleepy and may even fall asleep in
the clinician's waiting area. A subset of individuals with Primary Hypersomnia have a
family history of hypersomnia and also have symptoms of autonomic nervous system
dysfunction, including recurrent vascular-type headaches, reactivity of the peripheral
vascular system (Raynaud's phenomenon), and fainting. Individuals with the Recurrent
Kleine-Levin form may have nonspecific neurological examination findings including
depressed deep tendon reflexes, dysarthria, and nystagmus.
Specific Age or Gender Features
Voluntary napping increases with age, but this normal phenomenon is distinct from
Primary Hypersomnia. Kleine-Levin syndrome affects males about three times more often
than it affects females.
Prevalence
The true prevalence of Primary Hypersomnia in the general population is not known.
Approximately 5%-10% of individuals who present to sleep disorders clinics with
complaints of daytime sleepiness are diagnosed as having Primary Hypersomnia. The
Recurrent form of Primary Hypersomnia known as Kleine-Levin syndrome is rare.560
Sleep Disorders
Population surveys find a complaint of daytime sleepiness in 0.5%-5.0% of adults,
without regard to specific causes or diagnoses.
Course
Primary Hypersomnia typically begins between ages 15 and 30 years, with a gradual
progression over weeks to months. For most individuals, the course is then chronic and
stable, unless treatment is initiated. Kleine-Levin syndrome also begins during adoles-
cence and may continue its periodic course for decades, although it often resolves during
middle age.
Familial Pattern
The subgroup of individuals with autonomic dysfunction are more likely than other
individuals with Primary Hypersomnia to have family members with Primary
Hypersomnia. Kleine-Levin syndrome does not demonstrate familial aggregation.
Differential Diagnosis
"Normal" sleep duration varies considerably in the general population. "Long sleepers"
(i.e., individuals who require a greater than average amount of sleep) do not have
excessive daytime sleepiness, sleep drunkenness, or automatic behavior when they
obtain their required amount of nocturnal sleep. If social or occupational demands lead
to shorter nocturnal sleep, daytime symptoms may appear. In Primary Hypersomnia, by
contrast, symptoms of excessive sleepiness occur regardless of nocturnal sleep duration.
An inadequate amount of nocturnal sleep can produce symptoms of daytime
sleepiness very similar to those of Primary Hypersomnia. An average sleep duration of
fewer than 7 hours per night strongly suggests inadequate nocturnal sleep, and an
average of more than 9 hours of sleep per 24-hour period suggests Primary Hypersomnia
Individuals with inadequate nocturnal sleep typically "catch up" with longer sleep
durations on days when they are free from social or occupational demands or on
vacations. Unlike Primary Hypersomnia, insufficient nocturnal sleep is unlikely to persist
unabated for decades. A diagnosis of Primary Hypersomnia should not be made if there
is a question regarding the adequacy of nocturnal sleep duration. A diagnostic and
therapeutic trial of sleep extension for 10—14 days can often clarify the diagnosis.
Daytime sleepiness, which is a characteristic feature of Primary Hypersomnia, can
also occur in Primary Insomnia, but the sleepiness is less severe in individuals with
Primary Insomnia. When daytime sleepiness is judged to be due to insomnia, an
additional diagnosis of Primary Hypersomnia is not given.
Primary Hypersomnia and Narcolepsy are similar with respect to the degree of
daytime sleepiness, age at onset, and stable course over time, but can be distinguished
based on distinctive clinical and laboratory features. Individuals with Primary
Hypersomnia typically have longer and less disrupted nocturnal sleep, greater difficulty
awakening, more persistent daytime sleepiness (as opposed to more discrete "sleep
attacks" in Narcolepsy), longer and less refreshing daytime sleep episodes, and little or
no dreaming during daytime naps. By contrast, individuals with Narcolepsy have
cataplexy and recurrent intrusions of elements of REM sleep into the transition between
sleep and wakefulness (e.g., sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis). The MSLT
typically demonstrates shorter sleep latencies (i.e., greater physiological sleepiness) as307.44 Primary Hypersomnia
561
well as the presence of multiple sleep-onset REM periods in individuals with Narcolepsy.
Individuals with Primary Hypersomnia and Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
may have similar patterns of excessive sleepiness. Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder is
suggested by a history of loud snoring, pauses in breathing during sleep, brain injury,
or cardiovascular disease and by the presence of obesity, oropharyngeal anatomical
abnormalities, hypertension, or heart failure on physical examination. Polysomnographic
studies can confirm the presence of apneic events in Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
(and their absence in Primary Hypersomnia).
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder is often characterized by daytime sleepiness.
A history of an abnormal sleep-wake schedule (with shifted or irregular hours) is present
in individuals with Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder. Parasomnias rarely produce the
prolonged, undisturbed nocturnal sleep or daytime sleepiness characteristic of Primary
Hypersomnia.
Primary Hypersomnia must be distinguished from mental disorders that include
hypersomnia as an essential or associated feature. In particular, complaints of
daytime sleepiness may occur in a Major Depressive Episode, With Atypical
Features, and in the depressed phase of Bipolar Disorder. The diagnosis of Primary
Hypersomnia is not given if hypersomnia occurs exclusively during the course of another
mental disorder. A thorough investigation for the presence of other mental disorders is
essential before considering the diagnosis of Primary Hypersomnia. A diagnosis of
Primary Hypersomnia can be made in the presence of another current or past mental
disorder if the mental disorder is judged to not account for the hypersomnia or if the
hypersomnia and the mental disorder have an independent course (e.g., in an individual
with chronic hypersomnia who later develops a Major Depressive Disorder). In contrast,
when hypersomnia occurs as a manifestation of, and exclusively during the course of,
another mental disorder, the diagnosis of Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental
Disorder may be more appropriate. This diagnosis should only be considered when the
hypersomnia is the predominant complaint and is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention; otherwise, no separate diagnosis is necessary.
Primary Hypersomnia must be distinguished from Sleep Disorder Due to a
General Medical Condition, Hypersomnia Type. The diagnosis is Sleep Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition when the hypersomnia is judged to be a direct
physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., brain tumor)
(see p. 597). This determination is based on history, laboratory findings, or physical
examination. Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder, Hypersomnia Type, is distin-
guished from Primary Hypersomnia by the fact that a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse,
a medication, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the
hypersomnia (see p. 601). For example, hypersomnia occurring only in the context of
withdrawal from cocaine would be diagnosed as Cocaine-Induced Sleep Disorder,
Hypersomnia Type, With Onset During Withdrawal.
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
Primary Hypersomnia is analogous to the diagnosis of Idiopathic Hypersomnia in the
International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD). In addition, the ICSD includes a
separate category for Recurrent Hypersomnia, which is analogous to the Recurrent form
of Primary Hypersomnia.562
Sleep Disorders
I Diagnostic criteria for 307.44 Primary Hypersomnia
A. The predominant complaint is excessive sleepiness for at least 1 month
(or less if recurrent) as evidenced by either prolonged sleep episodes
or daytime sleep episodes that occur almost daily.
B. The excessive sleepiness causes clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The excessive sleepiness is not better accounted for by insomnia and
does not occur exclusively during the course of another Sleep Disorder
(e.g., Narcolepsy, Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, Circadian Rhythm
Sleep Disorder, or a Parasomnia) and cannot be accounted for by an
inadequate amount of sleep.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of another
mental disorder.
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
Specify if:
Recurrent: if there are periods of excessive sleepiness that last at least
3 days occurring several times a year for at least 2 years
347 Narcolepsy
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Narcolepsy are repeated irresistible attacks of refreshing sleep,
cataplexy, and recurrent intrusions of elements of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep into
the transition period between sleep and wakefulness. The individual's sleepiness
typically decreases after a sleep attack, only to return several hours later. The sleep
attacks must occur daily over a period of at least 3 months to establish the diagnosis
(Criterion A), although most individuals describe many years of sleep attacks prior to
seeking clinical attention. In addition to sleepiness, individuals with Narcolepsy experi-
ence one or both of the following: cataplexy (i.e., episodes of sudden, bilateral, reversible
loss of muscle tone that last for seconds to minutes and are usually precipitated by
intense emotion) (Criterion Bl) or recurrent intrusions of elements of rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep into the transition between sleep and wakefulness as manifested
by paralysis of voluntary muscles or dreamlike hallucinations (Criterion B2). Many sleep
experts allow the diagnosis to be made in the absence of cataplexy or intrusions of REM
sleep elements if the individual demonstrates pathological sleepiness and two or more
sleep-onset REM periods during a Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT). The symptoms
must not be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (including a medication)
or another general medical condition (Criterion C). Although Narcolepsy is classified in347 Narcolepsy
563
the chapter of ICD devoted to neurological conditions, it is included in this section to
assist in differential diagnosis in individuals with excessive sleepiness and is coded on
Axis I.
Episodes of sleepiness in Narcolepsy are often described as irresistible, resulting in
unintended sleep in inappropriate situations (e.g., while driving an automobile, attending
meetings, or carrying on a conversation). Low-stimulation, low-activity situations typi-
cally exaggerate the degree of sleepiness (e.g., falling asleep while reading, watching
television, or attending lectures). Sleep episodes generally last 10-20 minutes but can
last up to an hour if uninterrupted. Dreaming is frequently reported. Individuals have
varying abilities to "fight off" these sleep attacks. Some individuals take naps intentionally
in order to manage their sleepiness. Individuals with Narcolepsy typically have 2-6
episodes of sleep (intentional and unintentional) per day when untreated. Sleep episodes
are usually superimposed on a more normal degree of alertness, although some
individuals describe constant sleepiness of some degree.
Cataplexy often develops several years after the onset of daytime sleepiness and
occurs in approximately 70% of individuals with the disorder. The loss of muscle tone
with cataplexy may be subtle, leading to a sagging jaw or drooping eyelids, head, or
arms not noticeable to observers. Cataplexy can also be more dramatic, and the
individual may drop objects being carried, buckle at the knees, or actually fall to the
ground. Respiratory and eye muscles are not affected. The muscle weakness usually
lasts only seconds, although periods of up to a half hour have been reported. Episodes
are followed by a full return of normal muscle strength. Full consciousness and alertness
are preserved during cataplectic episodes. Individuals can clearly describe events and
have no confusion before or after the episode. Rarely, prolonged episodes of cataplexy
may lead into sleep episodes. Cataplexy is usually triggered by a strong emotional
stimulus (e.g., anger, surprise, laughter). Sleep deprivation typically increases the
frequency and severity of episodes of cataplexy.
Approximately 20%-40% of individuals with Narcolepsy also experience intense
dreamlike imagery just before falling asleep (hypnagogic hallucinations) or just after
awakening (hypnopompic hallucinations). Most sleep-related hallucinations are visual
and incorporate elements of the actual environment. For instance, individuals may
describe objects appearing through cracks in the wall or describe objects moving in a
picture on the wall. The hallucinations may also be auditory (e.g., hearing intruders in
the home) or kinetic (e.g., sensation of flying). Approximately 30%-50% of individuals
with Narcolepsy also experience sleep paralysis just on falling asleep or awakening. In
this condition, individuals describe being awake but unable to move or speak. They
may also complain of feeling unable to breathe, although the diaphragm is spared and
respiration continues. Sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis may occur simul-
taneously, resulting in an often terrifying experience of seeing or hearing unusual things
and being unable to move. Both sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis last for
seconds to a few minutes and terminate spontaneously. Both phenomena (vivid mental
imagery and skeletal muscle atonia) are thought to result from dissociated elements of
REM sleep intruding into wakefulness.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Some individuals with
Narcolepsy experience generalized daytime sleepiness between the discrete sleep564
Sleep Disorders
attacks. They may describe being able to sleep at any time in any situation. Automatic
behavior, in which the individual engages in activity without full awareness, can occur
as a result of profound sleepiness. Individuals may drive, converse, or even work during
episodes of automatic behavior. Frequent, intense, and vivid dreams may occur during
nocturnal sleep. Individuals with Narcolepsy often experience fragmented nighttime
sleep as a result of spontaneous awakenings or periodic limb movements. Rarely,
individuals may present with a chief complaint of insomnia, rather than hypersomnia.
Individuals with Narcolepsy may hesitate to engage in social activities because they
fear falling asleep or having an episode of cataplexy. They may also strive to prevent
attacks of cataplexy by exerting control over their emotions, which may lead to a
generalized lack of expressiveness that interferes with social relations. Narcolepsy can
severely limit daytime functioning because of repeated, uncontrollable sleep attacks,
automatic behavior, and episodes of cataplexy. Individuals with Narcolepsy are at risk
for accidental injury to themselves or others because of falling asleep in dangerous
situations (e.g., while driving an automobile or operating machinery).
A concurrent mental disorder or history of another mental disorder can be found in
approximately 40% of individuals with Narcolepsy. The most common associated
disorders are Mood Disorders (primarily Major Depressive Disorder and Dysthymia),
followed by Substance-Related Disorders and Generalized Anxiety Disorder. A history
of Parasomnias such as Sleepwalking Disorder, bruxism (clenching of the jaw and
grinding teeth), and Enuresis appears to be more common in individuals with Narco-
lepsy.
Associated laboratory findings. Findings from the daytime Multiple Sleep Latency
Test (MSLT) include an average sleep latency of less than 5 minutes and the appearance
of REM sleep during two or more naps on a five-nap MSLT. Sleep latencies of less than
10 minutes and sleep-onset REM periods during nocturnal polysomnographic studies
are also found frequently. Additional findings on polysomnography may include
frequent transient arousals, decreased sleep efficiency, increased stage 1 sleep, increased
REM sleep, and an increase in the frequency of eye movements within the REM periods
("REM density"). Periodic limb movements and episodes of sleep apnea are often noted,
but the latter occur less frequently than in Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder.
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing of individuals with Narcolepsy shows the
presence of HLA-DR2 (also known as DQw6) and DQwl (also known as DRwl5) in
90%-100% of individuals. However, these HLA antigens are also present in 10%-35% of
the general population.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Individuals with Narcolepsy frequently appear sleepy during the clinical interview and
examination and may actually fall asleep in the waiting area or examination room. During
episodes of cataplexy, individuals may slump in the chair and have slurred speech or
drooping eyelids.
Prevalence
Epidemiological studies indicate a prevalence of 0.02%-0.l6% for Narcolepsy in the adult
population, with equal rates in females and males.347 Narcolepsy
565
Course
Daytime sleepiness is almost always the first symptom of Narcolepsy and usually
becomes clinically significant during adolescence. However, on careful review, some
degree of sleepiness may have been present even during preschool and early school
ages. Onset after age 40 years is unusual. Acute psychosocial stressors or acute alterations
in the sleep-wake schedule herald the onset in roughly half of cases. Cataplexy may
develop concurrently with sleepiness, but often appears months, years, or even decades
after the onset of sleepiness. Sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis are more
variable symptoms of the disorder and may not occur in some individuals. Disrupted
nocturnal sleep usually develops later in the course of the disorder, often when
individuals are in their 40s or 50s.
The excessive sleepiness of Narcolepsy has a stable course over time. The
development of other Sleep Disorders (e.g., periodic limb movements or Breathing-
Related Sleep Disorder) may worsen the degree of sleepiness, whereas treatment with
stimulant medications may improve it. Cataplexy usually has a stable course as well,
although some individuals report decreased symptoms or even complete cessation of
symptoms after many years. Similarly, the sleep-related hallucinations and sleep paralysis
may go into remission while the daytime sleepiness and sleep attacks persist.
Familial Pattern
Data from HLA studies and family studies strongly suggest a role for genetic factors in
the development of Narcolepsy. The mode of inheritance has not been determined but
is likely multifactorial. Approximately 5%-15% of first-degree biological relatives of
probands with Narcolepsy have the disorder. Approximately 25%-50% of the first-degree
biological relatives of individuals with Narcolepsy have other disorders characterized by
excessive sleepiness (such as Primary Hypersomnia).
Differential Diagnosis
Narcolepsy must be differentiated from normal variations in sleep, sleep deprivation,
other primary Sleep Disorders, and Sleep Disorder Related to Another Mental Disorder,
Hypersomnia Type. Many individuals feel some sleepiness during the day, particularl
in the afternoon hours when an increase in physiological sleepiness occurs. However,
such individuals do not have irresistible sleep at other times of the day and can "fight
through" their sleepiness with increased mental and physical effort. They generally do
not experience cataplexy, sleep-related hallucinations, or sleep paralysis.
Sleep deprivation from any cause produces daytime sleepiness. Narcolepsy should
be diagnosed only if the individual has demonstrated a regular sleep-wake schedule
with an adequate amount of nocturnal sleep. Sleep deprivation and irregular sleep
schedules may rarely lead to sleep-related hallucinations or sleep paralysis, but not to
cataplexy.
The degree of daytime sleepiness may be similar in individuals with Narcolepsy an
Primary Hypersomnia. Compared with individuals with Narcolepsy, individuals wit
Primary Hypersomnia generally describe prolonged and less disrupted nocturnal sleep.
Daytime sleepiness in Primary Hypersomnia consists of more prolonged, unrefreshing
sleep periods, which have less urgency than the sleep "attacks" of Narcolepsy and are
less often associated with dreaming. Individuals with Primary Hypersomnia do not566
Sleep Disorders
manifest cataplexy, sleep-related hallucinations, or sleep paralysis. Nocturnal poly-
somnography confirms less disrupted sleep and normal REM latency in individuals wit
Primary Hypersomnia, and the MSLT does not show sleep-onset REM periods.
Individuals with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder often experience excessive
sleepiness that is equal in magnitude to that of individuals with Narcolepsy. Furthermore,
many individuals with Narcolepsy may develop some degree of sleep apnea. Breathing-
Related Sleep Disorder is distinguished from Narcolepsy by a history of loud snoring;
breathing pauses that disrupt nocturnal sleep; lengthy, unrefreshing daytime sleep
episodes; and the absence of accessory symptoms such as cataplexy. Polysomnography
can identify breathing pauses (apneas) in individuals with Breathing-Related Sleep
Disorder. Apneas in individuals with Narcolepsy tend to be less frequent and associated
with less oxyhemoglobin desaturation. If an individual presents an unambiguous history
of Narcolepsy together with confirmatory polysomnographic findings (sleep-onset REM)
and also has evidence of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder during polysomnography,
both diagnoses can be made. If an individual has sleep-onset REM and sleep apnea
activity during polysomnography, but does not have the full clinical syndrome of
Narcolepsy, then only a diagnosis of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder should be
made.
Individuals with Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder may report
excessive sleepiness and intense dreams. In particular, Major Depressive Episodes With
Atypical Features and Bipolar Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, often involve
an intense need for sleep during the daytime. However, individuals with Mood Disorders
typically have prolonged nocturnal sleep in contrast to the short, fragmented sleep of
Narcolepsy. Daytime naps are not refreshing in individuals with Mood Disorders.
Furthermore, these individuals do not have the accessory symptoms that are character-
istic of Narcolepsy (e.g., cataplexy), although individuals who have Major Depressive
Disorder, With Psychotic Features, may complain of hallucinations near sleep and at
other times. Polysomnographic studies of individuals with Mood Disorders may reveal
short REM latency, but typically not as short as that seen in Narcolepsy. Nocturnal slee
latency is also longer in individuals with Mood Disorders. Finally, daytime testing with
the MSLT shows a much lower degree of physiological sleepiness and infrequent
sleep-onset REM periods in individuals with Mood Disorders. Thus, the "sleepiness" in
these individuals appears to be more a manifestation of psychomotor retardation and
anergy.
The use of, or withdrawal from, substances (including medications) may
produce some symptoms of Narcolepsy. Cholinergic agonists (including anticholinester
ase pesticides) can disrupt sleep continuity and enhance REM sleep. Similar effects can
result from the abrupt discontinuation of anticholinergic agents, including tricyclic
antidepressants. Reserpine and methyldopa can enhance REM sleep and produce
sleepiness. Withdrawal from stimulants can produce severe somnolence. A diagnosis of
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder, Hypersomnia Type, might be warranted if the
symptoms are judged to be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (see
p. 601). Conversely, a diagnosis of Narcolepsy should not be made if the individual is
taking or has recently discontinued taking such substances.
Narcolepsy must be distinguished from Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition, Hypersomnia Type. The diagnosis is Sleep Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition when the symptoms are judged to be the direct physiological
consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g., closed head injury or
hypothalamic tumor) (see p. 597).780.59 Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
567
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD) diagnosis of Narcolepsy
includes the same essential features as the DSM-IV diagnosis.
Diagnostic criteria for 347 Narcolepsy
A. Irresistible attacks of refreshing sleep that occur daily over at least
3 months.
B. The presence of one or both of the following:
(1) cataplexy (i.e., brief episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle
tone, most often in association with intense emotion)
(2) recurrent intrusions of elements of rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep into the transition between sleep and wakefulness, as man-
ifested by either hypnopompic or hypnagogic hallucinations or
sleep paralysis at the beginning or end of sleep episodes
C. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another general
medical condition.
780.59 Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder is sleep disruption, leading to
excessive sleepiness or insomnia, that is judged to be due to abnormalities of ventilation
during sleep (e.g., sleep apnea or central alveolar hypoventilation) (Criterion A). This
sleep disruption must not be better accounted for by a mental disorder and is not due
to the direct physiological effects of a substance (including medication) or a general
medical condition that produces sleep symptoms through a mechanism other than
abnormal breathing (Criterion B).
Excessive sleepiness is the most common presenting complaint of individuals with
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. Sleepiness results from frequent arousals during
nocturnal sleep as the individual attempts to breathe normally. The sleepiness is most
evident in relaxing situations, such as when the individual is reading or watching
television. The individual's inability to control the sleepiness can be evident in boring
meetings or while attending movies, theater, or concerts. When sleepiness is extreme,
the person may fall asleep while actively conversing, eating, walking, or driving. Naps
tend to be unrefreshing and may be accompanied by a dull headache on awakening.
However, there can be considerable variation in the intensity of the sleepiness. The
impact of the sleepiness may be minimized by the individual, who may express pride
about being able to sleep anywhere at anytime.568
Sleep Disorders
Insomnia, frequent awakenings, or unrefreshing sleep are less frequent than daytime
sleepiness as the presenting complaint in individuals with Breathing-Related Sleep
Disorder. Some individuals may complain of difficulty breathing while lying supine or
sleeping.
Abnormal respiratory events during sleep in Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
include apneas (episodes of breathing cessation), hypopneas (abnormally slow or
shallow respiration), and hypoventilation (abnormal blood oxygen and carbon dioxide
levels). Three forms of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder have been described: obstruc-
tive sleep apnea syndrome, central sleep apnea syndrome, and central alveolar
hypoventilation syndrome.
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is the most common form of Breathing-Related
Sleep Disorder. It is characterized by repeated episodes of upper-airway obstruction
(apneas and hypopneas) during sleep. The central drive for respiration and respiratory
movements in the chest and abdomen are preserved. It usually occurs in overweight
individuals and leads to a complaint of excessive sleepiness. Obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome is characterized by loud snores or brief gasps that alternate with episodes of
silence that usually last 20-30 seconds. Snoring is caused by breathing through a partially
obstructed airway. Silent periods are caused by obstructive apneas, with the cessation
in breathing caused by complete airway obstruction. Typically the loud snoring has been
present for many years, often since childhood, but an increase in its severity may lead
the individual to seek evaluation. The snoring is commonly loud enough to disturb the
sleep of others in close proximity. The cessation of breathing, sometimes lasting as long
as 60-90 seconds and associated with cyanosis, may also be of concern to bedpartners.
The termination of the apneic event can be associated with loud "resuscitative" snores,
gasps, moans or mumbling, or whole-body movements. The bedpartner may have to
move to a separate bed or another room as a result of the affected individual's snoring,
gasps, and movements. Most affected individuals are unaware of the loud snoring,
breathing difficulty, and frequent arousals. However, some persons, particularly elderly
persons, are intensely aware of the sleep disturbance and present with a complaint of
frequent awakenings and unrefreshing sleep.
Central sleep apnea syndrome is characterized by episodic cessation of ventilation
during sleep (apneas and hypopneas) without airway obstruction. Thus, in contrast to
obstructive apnea events, central apneas are not associated with continued chest wall
and abdominal breathing movements and occur more commonly in elderly persons as
a result of cardiac or neurological conditions that affect ventilatory regulation. Individuals
most often present with complaints of insomnia due to repeated awakenings, which
they may or may not associate with breathing difficulties. Individuals with central sleep
apnea may have mild snoring, but it is not a prominent complaint.
The central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome is characterized by an impairment in
ventilatory control that results in abnormally low arterial oxygen levels further worsened
by sleep (hypoventilation without apneas or hypopneas). The lungs in individuals with
this disorder have normal mechanical properties. This form most commonly occurs in
very overweight individuals and can be associated with a complaint of either excessive
sleepiness or insomnia.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders.
The individual with
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder may complain of nocturnal chest discomfort, choking,780.59 Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
569
suffocation, or intense anxiety in association with apneic events or hypoventilation. Body
movements associated with breathing difficulties can be violent, and individuals with
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder are often described as restless sleepers. Individuals
with this disorder typically feel unrefreshed on awakening and may describe feeling
more tired in the morning than when they went to sleep. They may also describe sleep
drunkenness (i.e., extreme difficulty awakening, confusion, and inappropriate behavior).
Severe dryness of the mouth is common and often leads the person to drink water during
the night or on awakening in the morning. Nocturia occurs more often with the
progression of symptoms. Dull, generalized morning headaches can last for 1-2 hours
after awakening.
The sleepiness can lead to memory disturbance, poor concentration, irritability, and
personality changes. Mood Disorders (particularly Major Depressive Disorder and
Dysthymic Disorder), Anxiety Disorders (particularly Panic Disorder), and dementia are
commonly associated with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. Individuals can also have
reduced libido and erectile ability. Rarely, erectile dysfunction is the presenting complaint
of the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Children with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
may have developmental delay and learning difficulties. Excessive daytime sleepiness
can result in injuries (e.g., falling asleep while driving a vehicle) and can also cause
severe social and occupational impairment resulting in job loss, marital and family
problems, and decreased school performance.
Associated laboratory findings. Each of the major Breathing-Related Sleep Disor-
der syndromes produces specific abnormalities. In the obstructive sleep apnea syn-
drome, nocturnal polysomnography shows apneic episodes longer than 10 seconds in
duration (usually 20-40 seconds), with rare episodes lasting up to several minutes.
Hypopneas are characterized by a reduction of airflow. Both types of events are
associated with a reduction in oxyhemoglobin saturation. The central sleep apnea
syndrome may include Cheyne-Stokes respiration (i.e., a pattern of periodic breathing
consisting of an apnea, a 10- to 60-second episode of hyperventilation following the
apnea, and a gradual decrease in ventilation culminating in another apnea). In the central
alveolar hypoventilation syndrome, periods of decreased respiration lasting up to several
minutes occur, with sustained arterial oxygen desaturation and increased carbon dioxide
levels. Other features of nocturnal polysomnography in individuals with Breathing-
Related Sleep Disorder include short sleep duration, frequent awakenings, increased
amounts of stage 1 sleep, and decreased amounts of slow-wave sleep and rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep. The arousals that occur at the termination of the apneic an
hypoventilation events may be quite brief (several seconds).
Apneas, hypopneas, and hypoventilation may produce other disturbances: oxy-
hemoglobin desaturation, EGG abnormalities, elevated pulmonary and systemic arterial
pressure, and transient arousals as the individual terminates an episode of breathing
disturbance. Cardiac arrhythmias commonly occur during sleep in individuals with
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder and may include sinus arrhythmias, premature ven-
tricular contractions, atrioventricular block, or sinus arrest. Bradycardia followed by
tachycardia is commonly seen in association with apneic episodes. Frequent nocturnal
awakenings and oxyhemoglobin desaturation can result in excessive sleepiness that may
be detected by the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) or other tests of daytime
sleepiness. Mean sleep latency on the MSLT is often less than 10 minutes and can be
less than 5 minutes (normal is 10-20 minutes).
Arterial blood gas measurements while the person is awake are usually normal, but570
Sleep Disorders
some individuals with severe obstructive sleep apnea syndrome or central alveolar
hypoventilation syndrome can have waking hypoxemia or hypercarbia. Cephalometric
X rays, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and fiber-optic
endoscopy can show obstruction of the upper airway. Cardiac testing may show
evidence of impaired right ventricular function. Individuals may also have elevated
hemoglobin or hematocrit values due to repeated nocturnal hypoxemia.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
The majority of individuals with the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and the central
alveolar hypoventilation syndrome are overweight and notice an increase in the severity
of symptoms with increasing body weight. Upper-airway narrowing can occur due to
excessive bulk of soft tissues. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome occurring in individuals
of normal or below-normal body weight suggests upper-airway obstruction due to
definable, localized structural abnormality, such as a maxillomandibular malformation
or adenotonsillar enlargement. Individuals may have noisy breathing even while awake.
Gastroesophageal reflux with severe "heartburn" pain may occur in the obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome in association with the effort to reestablish breathing during sleep.
Individuals with central sleep apnea syndrome less frequently are overweight or have
demonstrable upper-airway obstructions.
Mild systemic hypertension with elevated diastolic pressure is commonly associated
with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. Some individuals, particularly those with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease or alveolar hypoventilation, have continuously low
oxygen saturation values during sleep and are predisposed to developing pulmonary
hypertension and associated right-sided cardiac failure, hepatic congestion, and ankle
edema.
Individuals with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder may have an underlying abnor-
mality in the neurological control of the upper-airway musculature or ventilation during
sleep. Disorders affecting neurological control of ventilation usually manifest as the
central sleep apnea syndrome. Some individuals with neurological conditions have a
specific lesion affecting the control of pharyngeal muscles, which may lead to the
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder can be associated with systemic general medical
or neurological conditions. For instance, obstructive sleep apnea may result from tongue
enlargement due to acromegaly, lingual thyroid tissue or cysts, or vocal cord paralysis
as seen in Shy-Drager syndrome. Impaired cardiac function due to reduced cardiac
output can result in central sleep apnea, as can neurological conditions that affect the
brain stem control of respiration, such as syringobulbia or brain stem tumors.
Specific Age and Gender Features
In young children, the signs and symptoms of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder (almost
exclusively the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome) are more subtle than those in adults
and the diagnosis is more difficult to establish. In children, polysomnography is
especially useful in confirming the diagnosis. Snoring, which is characteristic of adult
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, might not be present. Agitated arousals and unusual
sleep postures, such as sleeping on the hands and knees, commonly occur. Nocturnal
enuresis is also common and should raise the suspicion of obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome if it recurs in a child who was previously dry at night. Children may also780.59 Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
571
manifest excessive daytime sleepiness, although this is not as common or pronounced
as in adults. Daytime mouth breathing, difficulty in swallowing, and poor speech
articulation are also common features in children. On physical examination, pectus
excavatum and rib flaring can be seen. If associated with adenotonsillar enlargement,
typical "adenoid fades" can be seen with a dull expression, periorbital edema, and mouth
breathing.
The obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is most common in middle-aged, overweight
males and prepubertal children with enlarged tonsils. The central alveolar hypoventila-
tion syndrome is more common in obese young-adult males. Aging leads to an increase
in the frequency of both obstructive and central apnea events, even among asymptomatic
healthy individuals. Because some degree of apnea may be normative with aging,
polysomnographic results must be interpreted within this context. On the other hand,
significant clinical symptoms of insomnia and hypersomnia should be investigated
regardless of the individual's age, and a diagnosis of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
should be made if a breathing disturbance best explains the symptoms.
In adults, the male-to-female ratio of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is about 8:1.
There is no sex difference among prepubertal children. In adults, central apneic events
appear to be more prevalent in males than in females, although this difference is less
apparent after menopause.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder associated with obstructive sleep
apnea is estimated to be approximately 1%-10% in the adult population, but may be
higher in elderly individuals. The prevalence of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder also
varies considerably as a function of the threshold for the frequency of apnea events.
Course
The obstructive sleep apnea syndrome can occur at any age, but most individuals present
for evaluation when they are between ages 40 and 60 years (with females more likely
to develop obstructive sleep apnea after menopause). Central sleep apnea is more
commonly seen in elderly individuals with central nervous system or cardiac disease.
The central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome and central sleep apnea syndrome can
develop at any age.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder usually has an insidious onset, gradual progres-
sion, and chronic course. Most often, the disorder will have been present for years by
the time it is diagnosed. Spontaneous resolution of the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
has been reported with weight loss, but usually the course is progressive and can
ultimately lead to premature death due to cardiovascular disease or arrhythmia. The
central sleep apnea syndrome also has a chronic unremitting course, although manage-
ment of underlying medical conditions may improve the breathing disturbance. Adults
with the central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome have a slowly progressive course.
Familial Pattern
A familial tendency for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome has been described.572
Sleep Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Breathing-Relating Sleep Disorder must be differentiated from other causes of sleepiness,
such as Narcolepsy, Primary Hypersomnia, and Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder can be differentiated from Narcolepsy by the absence
of cataplexy, sleep-related hallucinations, and sleep paralysis and by the presence of
loud snoring, gasping during sleep, or observed apneas or shallow breathing in sleep.
Daytime sleep episodes in Narcolepsy are characteristically shorter, more refreshing, and
more often associated with dreaming. Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder shows charac-
teristic apneas or hypoventilation during nocturnal polysomnographic studies, and
Narcolepsy results in multiple sleep-onset REM periods during the MSLT. Some individ
uals have concurrent Narcolepsy and Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. Breathing-
Related Sleep Disorder may be distinguished from Primary Hypersomnia and
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder based on the presence of clinical or laboratory
findings of obstructive sleep apnea, central sleep apnea, or central alveolar hypoventila-
tion syndromes. Definitive differential diagnosis between Primary Hypersomnia and
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder may require polysomnographic studies.
Hypersomnia related to a Major Depressive Episode can be distinguished from
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder by the presence or absence of other characteristic
symptoms (e.g., depressed mood and loss of interest in a Major Depressive Episode and
snoring and gasping during sleep in Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder).
Individuals with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder must also be differentiated from
otherwise asymptomatic adults who snore. This differentiation can be made based
on the presenting complaint of insomnia or hypersomnia, the greater intensity of snoring,
and the presence of the characteristic history, signs, and symptoms of Breathing-Related
Sleep Disorder. For individuals complaining of insomnia, Primary Insomnia can be
differentiated from Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder by the absence of complaints (or
reports from bedpartners) of difficulty breathing during sleep and the absence of the
history, signs, and symptoms characteristic of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder.
Nocturnal Panic Attacks may include symptoms of gasping or choking during
sleep that may be difficult to distinguish clinically from Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder.
However, the lower frequency of episodes, intense autonomic arousal, and the lack of
excessive sleepiness differentiates nocturnal Panic Attacks from Breathing-Related Sleep
Disorder. Polysomnography in individuals with nocturnal Panic Attacks does not reveal
the typical pattern of apneas, hypoventilation, or oxygen desaturation characteristic of
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder.
The diagnosis of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder is appropriate in the presence of
a general medical condition that causes insomnia or hypersomnia through the
mechanism of impaired ventilation during sleep. For example, an individual with tonsillar
hypertrophy who has sleep difficulty related to snoring and obstructive sleep apneas
should receive a diagnosis of Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder on Axis I and tonsillar
hypertrophy on Axis III. In contrast, Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
is appropriate if a general medical or neurological condition causes sleep-related
symptoms through a mechanism other than breathing disturbance. For instance,
individuals with arthritis or renal impairment may complain of insomnia or hypersomnia,
but this does not result from breathing impairment during sleep.
The use of, or withdrawal from, substances (including medications) can produce
insomnia or hypersomnia similar to that in Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. A carefu
history is usually sufficient to identify the relevant substance, and follow-up shows307.45 Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
573
improvement of the sleep disturbance after discontinuation of the substance. In other
cases, the use of a substance (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, or benzodiazepines) can
exacerbate Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. An individual with symptoms and signs
consistent with Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder should receive that diagnosis, even in
the presence of concurrent substance use that is exacerbating the condition.
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder is identified as three more specific syndromes in the
International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD): Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syn-
drome, Central Sleep Apnea Syndrome, and Central Alveolar Hypoventilation Syndrome.
Diagnostic criteria for 780.59 Breathing-Related
Sleep Disorder
A. Sleep disruption, leading to excessive sleepiness or insomnia, that is
judged to be due to a sleep-related breathing condition (e.g., obstructive
or central sleep apnea syndrome or central alveolar hypoventilation
syndrome).
B. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another general medical condition (other
than a breathing-related disorder).
Coding note: Also code sleep-related breathing disorder on Axis III.
307.45 Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
(formerly Sleep-Wake Schedule Disorder)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder is a persistent or recurrent
pattern of sleep disruption that results from a mismatch between the individual's
endogenous circadian sleep-wake system on the one hand, and exogenous demands
regarding the timing and duration of sleep on the other (Criterion A). In contrast to other
primary Sleep Disorders, Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder does not result from the
mechanisms generating sleep and wakefulness per se. As a result of this circadian
mismatch, individuals with this disorder may complain of insomnia at certain times
during the day and excessive sleepiness at other times, with resulting impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or marked subjective distress
(Criterion B). The sleep problems are not better accounted for by other Sleep Disorders574
Sleep Disorders
or other mental disorders (Criterion C) and are not due to the direct physiological effects
of a substance or a general medical condition (Criterion D).
The diagnosis of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder should be reserved for those
presentations in which the individual has significant social or occupational impairment
or marked distress related to the sleep disturbance. Individuals vary widely in their ability
to adapt to circadian changes and requirements. Many, if not most, individuals with
circadian-related symptoms of sleep disturbance do not seek treatment and do not have
symptoms of sufficient severity to warrant a diagnosis. Those who present for evaluation
because of this disorder are most often troubled by the severity or persistence of their
symptoms. For example, it is not unusual for shift workers to present for evaluation after
falling asleep while on the job or while driving.
The diagnosis of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder rests primarily on the clinical
history, including the pattern of work, sleep, naps, and "free time." The history should
also examine past attempts at coping with symptoms, such as attempts at advancing the
sleep-wake schedule in Delayed Sleep Phase Type. Prospective sleep-wake diaries or
sleep charts are often a useful adjunct to diagnosis.
Subtypes
Delayed Sleep Phase Type. This type of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
results from an endogenous sleep-wake cycle that is delayed relative to the
demands of society. Measurement of endogenous circadian rhythms (e.g., core
body temperature) reflects this delay. Individuals with this subtype ("night owls")
are hypothesized to have an abnormally diminished ability to phase-advance
sleep-wake hours (i.e., to move sleep and wakefulness to earlier clock times).
As a result, these individuals are "locked in" to habitually late sleep hours and
cannot move these sleep hours forward to an earlier time. The circadian phase
of sleep is stable: individuals will fall asleep and awaken at consistent, albeit
delayed, times when left to their own schedule (e.g., on weekends or vacations).
Affected individuals complain of difficulty falling asleep at socially acceptable
hours, but once sleep is initiated, it is normal. There is concomitant difficulty
awakening at socially acceptable hours (e.g., multiple alarm clocks are often
unable to arouse the individual). Because many individuals with this disorder
will be chronically sleep deprived, sleepiness during the desired wake period
may occur.
Jet Lag Type. In this type of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder, the endogenous
circadian sleep-wake cycle is normal and the disturbance arises from conflict
between the pattern of sleep and wakefulness generated by the circadian system
and the pattern of sleep and wakefulness required by a new time zone. Individuals
with this type complain of a mismatch between desired and required hours of
sleep and wakefulness. The severity of the mismatch is proportional to the
number of time zones traveled through, with maximal difficulties often noted
after traveling through eight or more time zones in less than 24 hours. Eastward
travel (advancing sleep-wake hours) is typically more difficult for most individuals
to tolerate than westward travel (delaying sleep-wake hours).
Shift Work Type. In this type of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder, the
endogenous circadian sleep-wake cycle is normal and the disturbance arises from
conflict between the pattern of sleep and wakefulness generated by the circadian
system and the desired pattern of sleep and wakefulness required by shift work.307.45 Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
575
Rotating-shift schedules are the most disruptive because they force sleep and
wakefulness into aberrant circadian positions and prevent any consistent adjust-
ment. Night- and rotating-shift workers typically have a shorter sleep duration
and more frequent disturbances in sleep continuity than morning and afternoon
workers. Conversely, there may also be sleepiness during the desired wake
period, that is, in the middle of the night work shift. The circadian mismatch of
the Shift Work Type is further exacerbated by insufficient sleep time, social and
family demands, and environmental disturbances (e.g., telephone, traffic noise)
during intended sleep times.
Unspecified Type. This type of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder should be
indicated if another pattern of circadian sleep disturbance (e.g., advanced sleep
phase, non-24-hour sleep-wake pattern, or irregular sleep-wake pattern) is
present. An "advanced sleep phase pattern" is the analog of Delayed Sleep Phase
Type, but in the opposite direction: individuals complain of an inability to stay
awake in the evening and spontaneous awakening in the early morning hours.
"Non-24-hour sleep-wake pattern" denotes a free-running cycle: the sleep-wake
schedule follows the endogenous circadian rhythm period of approximately
24-25 hours despite the presence of 24-hour time cues in the environment. In
contrast to the stable sleep-wake pattern of the Delayed or advanced sleep phase
types, these individuals' sleep-wake schedules become progressively delayed
relative to the 24-hour clock, resulting in a changing sleep-wake pattern over
successive days. "Irregular sleep-wake pattern" indicates the absence of an
identifiable pattern of sleep and wakefulness.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. In Delayed Sleep Phase
Type, individuals frequently go to bed later and wake up later on weekends or during
vacations, with a reduction in sleep-onset difficulties and difficulty awakening. They will
typically give many examples of school, work, and social difficulties arising from their
inability to awaken at socially desired times. If awakened earlier than the time dictated
by the circadian timekeeping system, the individual may demonstrate "sleep drunken-
ness" (i.e., extreme difficulty awakening, confusion, and inappropriate behavior).
Performance often also follows a delayed phase, with peak efficiency occurring in
late-evening hours.
Jet Lag and Shift Work Types may be more common in individuals who are "morning
types." Performance is often impaired during desired waking hours, following the pattern
that would be predicted by the underlying endogenous circadian rhythms. Jet lag is
often accompanied by nonspecific symptoms (e.g., headache, fatigue, indigestion) that
relate to travel conditions, such as sleep deprivation, alcohol and caffeine use, and
decreased ambient air pressure in airplane cabins. Dysfunction in occupational, family,
and social roles is often observed in individuals who have difficulty coping with shift
work. Individuals with any Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder may have a history of
alcohol, sedative-hypnotic, or stimulant use resulting from attempts to control their
inappropriately phased sleep-wake tendencies. The use of these substances may in turn
exacerbate the Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder.
Delayed Sleep Phase Type has been associated with schizoid, schizotypal, and
avoidant personality features, particularly in adolescents. "Non-24-hour sleep-wake
pattern" and "irregular sleep-wake pattern" have also been associated with these same576
Sleep Disorders
features. Jet Lag and Shift Work Types may precipitate or exacerbate a Manic or Major
Depressive Episode or an episode of a Psychotic Disorder.
Associated laboratory findings. Sleep studies yield different results depending on
what time they are performed. For individuals with Delayed Sleep Phase Type, studies
conducted at the preferred sleep times will be essentially normal for age. However,
when studied at socially normal sleep times, these individuals have prolonged sleep
latency, spontaneous awakening occurring late relative to social convention, and (in
some individuals) moderately short REM sleep latency. Sleep continuity is normal for
age. Laboratory procedures designed to measure the phase of the endogenous circadian
pacemaker (e.g., core body temperature) reveal the expected phase delay in the timing
of acrophase (peak time) and nadir.
When studied during their habitual workweek sleep hours, individuals with Shift
Work Type usually have normal or short sleep latency, reduced sleep duration, and
more frequent sleep continuity disturbances compared with age-matched individuals
with "normal" nocturnal sleep patterns. There is a specific reduction in stage 2 and REM
sleep in many cases. Tests of sleep tendency, such as the Multiple Sleep Latency Test
(MSLT), show a high degree of sleepiness during desired wake times (e.g., during the
night shift). When studied after a period of adjustment to a normal diurnal schedule,
these individuals have normal nocturnal sleep and normal levels of daytime sleepiness.
Laboratory studies of 6-hour simulated jet lag demonstrate prolonged sleep latency,
impaired sleep efficiency, reductions in REM sleep, and minor reductions in slow-wave
sleep. These features recover toward baseline values over 1-2 weeks.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
No specific physical findings are described for Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder. Shift
workers may appear haggard or sleepy and may have an excess of cardiovascular and
gastrointestinal disturbances, including gastritis and peptic ulcer disease. The roles of
caffeine and alcohol consumption and altered eating patterns have not been fully
evaluated in these cases. "Non-24-hour sleep-wake pattern" often occurs in blind
individuals. Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder may exacerbate preexisting general
medical conditions.
Specific Age Features
Shift work and jet lag symptoms are often reported to be more severe, or more easily induced,
in late-middle-aged and elderly individuals compared with young adults. "Advanced sleep
phase pattern" also increases with age. These findings may result from age-related
deterioration in nocturnal sleep and shortening of the endogenous circadian period.
Prevalence The prevalence for any of the types of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
has not been well established. Surveys suggest a prevalence of up to 7% for Delayed
Sleep Phase Type in adolescents and of up to 60% for Shift Work Type in night-shift
workers.
Course
Without intervention, Delayed Sleep Phase Type typically lasts for years or decades but
may "correct" itself given the tendency for endogenous circadian rhythm phase to307.45 Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
577
advance with age. Treatment with progressive phase delay of the sleep-wake schedule
can often normalize sleep hours at least temporarily, but there is a persistent vulnerability
for falling back to delayed sleep hours.
Shift Work Type typically persists for as long as the individual works that particular
schedule. Reversal of symptoms generally occurs within 2 weeks of a return to a normal
diurnal sleep-wake schedule.
Experimental and field data concerning jet lag indicate that it takes approximately
1 day per time zone traveled for the circadian system to resynchronize itself to the new
local time. Different circadian rhythms (such as core body temperature, hormonal level,
alertness, and sleep patterns) may readjust at different rates.
Differential Diagnosis
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder must be distinguished from normal patterns of sleep
and normal adjustments following a change in schedule. The key to such
distinctions lies in the persistence of the disturbance and the presence and degree of
social or occupational impairment. For instance, many adolescents and young adults
maintain delayed sleep-wake schedules, but without distress or interference with school
or work routines. Almost anyone who travels across time zones will experience transient
sleep disruption. The diagnosis of the Jet Lag Type should be reserved for an individual
with frequent travel requirements and associated severe sleep disturbances and work
disruption.
Delayed Sleep Phase Type must be differentiated from volitional patterns of
delayed sleep hours. Some individuals who voluntarily delay sleep onset to participate
in social or work activities may complain of difficulty awakening. When permitted to
do so, these individuals fall asleep readily at earlier times and, after a period of recovery
sleep, have no significant difficulty awakening in the morning. In such cases, the primary
problem is sleep deprivation rather than a Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder. Other
individuals (particularly children and adolescents) may volitionally shift sleep hours to
avoid school or family demands. The pattern of difficulty awakening vanishes when
desired activities are scheduled in the morning hours. In a similar way, younger children
involved in limit-setting battles with parents may present as having Delayed Sleep Phase
Type.
Jet Lag and Shift Work Types must be distinguished mainly from other primary Sleep
Disorders, such as Primary Insomnia and Primary Hypersomnia. The history of jet
lag or shift work, with undisturbed sleep on other schedules, usually provides sufficient
evidence to exclude these other disorders. In some cases, other primary Sleep Disorders,
such as Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder or periodic limb movements during sleep, may
complicate Shift Work or Jet Lag Types. This possibility should be suspected when
reversion to a normal diurnal schedule does not provide relief from sleep-related
symptoms. Other types of Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder, such as "non-24-hour
sleep-wake pattern" and "irregular sleep-wake pattern," are distinguished from the
Delayed Sleep Phase Type by the stably delayed sleep-wake hours characteristic of the
latter.
Patterns of delayed or advanced sleep that occur exclusively during another
mental disorder are not diagnosed separately (e.g., a pattern of early morning
awakening in Major Depressive Disorder or a pattern of delayed sleep in Schizophrenia).
Substances (including medications) can cause delayed sleep onset or awakening578
Sleep Disorders
in the morning. For instance, consumption of caffeine or nicotine in the evening may
delay sleep onset, and the use of hypnotic medications in the middle of the night may
delay the time of awakening. A diagnosis of Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder may
be considered if the sleep disturbance is judged to be a direct physiological consequence
of regular substance use and warrants independent clinical attention (see p. 601).
General medical conditions rarely cause fixed delays or advances of the sleep-wake
schedule and typically pose no difficulty in differential diagnosis.
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD) includes categories for Delayed
Sleep Phase Syndrome, Shift Work Sleep Disorder and Time Zone Change 0et Lag)
Syndrome, and specific categories for three other Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders
(Irregular Sleep-Wake Pattern, Advanced Sleep Phase Syndrome, and Non-24-Hour
Sleep-Wake Syndrome).
I Diagnostic criteria for 307.45 Circadian Rhythm
Sleep Disorder
A. A persistent or recurrent pattern of sleep disruption leading to excessive
sleepiness or insomnia that is due to a mismatch between the sleep-wake
schedule required by a person's environment and his or her circadian
sleep-wake pattern.
B. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of another
Sleep Disorder or other mental disorder.
D. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
Specifyype:
Delayed Sleep Phase Type: a persistent pattern of late sleep onset and
late awakening times, with an inability to fall asleep and awaken at a
desired earlier time
Jet Lag Type: sleepiness and alertness that occur at an inappropriate time
of day relative to local time, occurring after repeated travel across more
than one time zone
Shift Work Type: insomnia during the major sleep period or excessive
sleepiness during the major awake period associated with night shift work
or frequently changing shift work
Unspecified Type307.47 Dyssomnia Not Otherwise Specified 579
307.47 Dyssomnia Not Otherwise Specified
The Dyssomnia Not Otherwise Specified category is for insomnias, hypersomnias, or
circadian rhythm disturbances that do not meet criteria for any specific Dyssomnia.
Examples include
1. Complaints of clinically significant insomnia or hypersomnia that are attributable
to environmental factors (e.g., noise, light, frequent interruptions).
2. Excessive sleepiness that is attributable to ongoing sleep deprivation.
3. Idiopathic "Restless Legs Syndrome": uncomfortable sensations (e.g., discomfort,
crawling sensations, or restlessness) that lead to an intense urge to move the
legs. Typically, the sensations begin in the evening before sleep onset and are
temporarily relieved by moving the legs or walking, only to begin again when
the legs are immobile. The sensations can delay sleep onset or awaken the
individual from sleep.
4. Idiopathic periodic limb movements ("nocturnal myoclonus"): repeated low-
amplitude brief limb jerks, particularly in the lower extremities. These move-
ments begin near sleep onset and decrease during stage 3 or 4 non-rapid eye
movement (NREM) and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Movements usually
occur rhythmically every 20-60 seconds, leading to repeated, brief arousals.
Individuals are typically unaware of the actual movements, but may complain
of insomnia, frequent awakenings, or daytime sleepiness if the number of
movements is very large.
5. Situations in which the clinician has concluded that a Dyssomnia is present but
is unable to determine whether it is primary, due to a general medical condition,
or substance induced.
Parasomnias
Parasomnias are disorders characterized by abnormal behavioral or physiological events
occurring in association with sleep, specific sleep stages, or sleep-wake transitions.
Unlike dyssomnias, parasomnias do not involve abnormalities of the mechanisms
generating sleep-wake states, nor of the timing of sleep and wakefulness. Rather,
parasomnias represent the activation of physiological systems at inappropriate times
during the sleep-wake cycle. In particular, these disorders involve activation of the
autonomic nervous system, motor system, or cognitive processes during sleep or
sleep-wake transitions. Different parasomnias occur at different times during sleep, and
specific parasomnias often occur during specific sleep stages. Individuals with
parasomnias usually present with complaints of unusual behavior during sleep, rather
than complaints of insomnia or excessive daytime sleepiness. This section includes
Nightmare Disorder, Sleep Terror Disorder, Sleepwalking Disorder, and Parasomnia Not
Otherwise Specified.580
Sleep Disorders
307.47 Nightmare Disorder
(formerlyDream Anxiety Disorder)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Nightmare Disorder is the repeated occurrence of frightening
dreams that lead to awakenings from sleep (Criterion A). The individual becomes fully
alert on awakening (Criterion B). The frightening dreams or sleep interruptions resulting
from the awakenings cause the individual significant distress or result in social or
occupational dysfunction (Criterion C). This disorder is not diagnosed if the nightmares
occur exclusively during the course of another mental disorder or are due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse or a medication) or a general
medical condition (Criterion D).
Nightmares typically occur in a lengthy, elaborate dream sequence that is highly
anxiety provoking or terrifying. Dream content most often focuses on imminent physical
danger to the individual (e.g., pursuit, attack, injury). In other cases, the perceived danger
may be more subtle, involving personal failure or embarrassment. Nightmares that occur
after traumatic experiences may replicate the original dangerous or threatening situation,
but most nightmares do not recount actual events. On awakening, individuals with this
disorder can describe the dream sequence and content in detail. Individuals may report
multiple nightmares within a given night, often with a recurrent theme. Nightmares arise
almost exclusively during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Because REM episodes
occur periodically throughout nocturnal sleep (approximately every 90-110 minutes),
nightmares may also occur at any time during the sleep episode. However, because REM
sleep periods typically become longer and dreaming more intense in the second half of
the night, nightmares are also more likely to occur later in the night.
Nightmares usually terminate with an awakening that is associated with a rapid
return of full alertness and a lingering sense of fear or anxiety. These factors often lead
to difficulty returning to sleep. Nightmare Disorder causes significant subjective distress
more often than it causes demonstrable social or occupational impairment. However, if
nocturnal awakenings are frequent, or if the individual avoids sleeping because of fear
of nightmares, the individual may experience excessive sleepiness, poor concentration,
depression, anxiety, or irritability that can disrupt daytime functioning.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. In individuals with Night-
mare Disorder, mild autonomic arousal (e.g., sweating, tachycardia, tachypnea) may be
evident on awakening. Depressive and anxiety symptoms that do not meet criteria for
a specific diagnosis are common among individuals with Nightmare Disorder. Body
movements and vocalization are not characteristic of Nightmare Disorder because of the
loss of skeletal muscle tone that normally occurs during REM sleep. When talking,
screaming, or striking out do occur, these are most likely to appear as brief phenomena
that terminate a nightmare. These behaviors are also more likely to occur in the
nightmares that accompany Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, because these nightmares may
occur during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep.
Associated laboratory findings. Polysomnographic studies demonstrate abrupt
awakenings from REM sleep that correspond to the individual's report of nightmares.307.47 Nightmare Disorder
581
These awakenings usually occur during the second half of the night. In most cases, the
REM sleep episode will have lasted for more than 10 minutes and may include a
greater-than-average number of eye movements. Heart rate and respiratory rate may
increase or show increased variability before the awakening. Nightmares following
traumatic events (e.g., in individuals with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder) may arise during
NREM sleep, particularly stage 2, as well as during REM sleep. Other polysomnographic
features, including sleep continuity and sleep architecture, are not characteristically
abnormal in Nightmare Disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
The significance attributed to nightmares may vary with cultural background. For
instance, some cultures may relate nightmares to spiritual or supernatural phenomena,
whereas others may view nightmares as indicators of mental or physical disturbance.
Because nightmares frequently occur during childhood, this diagnosis should not be
given unless there is persistent significant distress or impairment that warrants indepen-
dent clinical attention. Nightmare Disorder is most likely to appear in children exposed
to severe psychosocial stressors. Although specific dream content may reflect the age of
the individual having the nightmares, the essential features of the disorder are the same
across age groups. Females report having nightmares more often than do men, at a ratio
of approximately 2-4:1. It is not clear to what extent this difference reflects a true
discrepancy in the number of nightmares as opposed to a variance in reporting.
Prevalence
Between 10% and 50% of children ages 3-5 years have nightmares of sufficient intensity
to disturb their parents. In the adult population, as many as 50% of individuals may
report at least an occasional nightmare. However, the actual prevalence of Nightmare
Disorder is unknown.
Course
Nightmares often begin between ages 3 and 6 years. When the frequency is high (e.g.,
several per week), the dreams may become a source of concern and distress to both
children and parents. Most children who develop a nightmare problem outgrow it. In a
minority, the dreams may persist at high frequency into adulthood, becoming virtually
a lifelong disturbance. A tendency toward amelioration of the disorder in later decades
has been described.
Differential Diagnosis
Nightmare Disorder should be differentiated from Sleep Terror Disorder. Both
disorders include awakenings or partial awakenings with fearfulness and autonomic
activation, but can be differentiated by several clinical features. Nightmares typically
occur later in the night during REM sleep and produce vivid dream imagery, complete
awakenings, mild autonomic arousal, and detailed recall of the event. Sleep terrors
typically arise in the first third of the night during stage 3 or 4 NREM sleep and produce
either no dream recall or single images without the storylike quality that is typical of582
Sleep Disorders
nightmares. Sleep terrors lead to partial awakenings in which the individual is confused,
disoriented, and only partially responsive and has significant autonomic arousal. In
contrast to Nightmare Disorder, the individual with Sleep Terror Disorder has amnesia
for the event on awakening in the morning.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder can lead to awakenings with autonomic
arousal, but these are not accompanied by recall of frightening dreams. Nightmares are
a frequent complaint of individuals with Narcolepsy, but the presence of excessive
sleepiness and cataplexy differentiates this condition from Nightmare Disorder. Panic
Attacks arising during sleep can also produce abrupt awakenings with autonomic
arousal and fearfulness, but the individual does not report frightening dreams and can
identify these symptoms as consistent with other Panic Attacks. The presence of complex
motor activity during frightening dreams should prompt further evaluation for other
Sleep Disorders, such as "REM sleep behavior disorder" (see Parasomnia Not Other-
wise Specified).
Numerous medications that affect the autonomic nervous system can precipitate
nightmares. Examples include L-dopa and other dopaminergic agonists; beta-adrenergic
antagonists and other antihypertensive medications; amphetamine, cocaine, and other
stimulants; and antidepressant medications. Conversely, withdrawal of medications that
suppress REM sleep, such as antidepressant medications and alcohol, can lead to a REM
sleep "rebound" accompanied by nightmares. If the nightmares are sufficiently severe
to warrant independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of Substance-Induced Sleep
Disorder, Parasomnia Type, may be considered (see p. 601). Nightmare Disorder also
should not be diagnosed if the disturbing dreams arise as a direct physiological effect
of a general medical condition (e.g., central nervous system infection, vascular lesions
of the brain stem, general medical conditions causing delirium). If the nightmares are
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention, Sleep Disorder Due to a
General Medical Condition, Parasomnia Type, may be considered (see p. 597).
Although nightmares may frequently occur during a delirium, a separate diagnosis of
Nightmare Disorder is not given.
Nightmares occur frequently as part of other mental disorders (e.g., Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder, Schizophrenia, Mood Disorders, other Anxiety Disorders, Adjustment
Disorders, and Personality Disorders). If the nightmares occur exclusively during the
course of another mental disorder, the diagnosis of Nightmare Disorder is not given.
Many individuals experience an occasional, isolated nightmare. Nightmare Disorder
is not diagnosed unless the frequency and severity of nightmares result in significant
distress or impairment.
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
Nightmare Disorder corresponds to the diagnosis of Nightmares in the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD).307.46 Sleep Terror Disorder
583
Diagnostic criteria for 307.47 Nightmare Disorder
A. Repeated awakenings from the major sleep period or naps with detailed
recall of extended and extremely frightening dreams, usually involving
threats to survival, security, or self-esteem. The awakenings generally
occur during the second half of the sleep period.
B. On awakening from the frightening dreams, the person rapidly becomes
oriented and alert (in contrast to the confusion and disorientation seen
in Sleep Terror Disorder and some forms of epilepsy).
C. The dream experience, or the sleep disturbance resulting from the
awakening, causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The nightmares do not occur exclusively during the course of another
mental disorder (e.g., a delirium, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder) and are
not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition.
307.46 Sleep Terror Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Sleep Terror Disorder is the repeated occurrence of sleep terrors,
that is, abrupt awakenings from sleep usually beginning with a panicky scream or cry
(Criterion A). Sleep terrors usually begin during the first third of the major sleep episode
and last 1-10 minutes. The episodes are accompanied by autonomic arousal and
behavioral manifestations of intense fear (Criterion B). During an episode, the individual
is difficult to awaken or comfort (Criterion C). If the individual awakens after the sleep
terror, no dream is recalled, or only fragmentary, single images are recalled. On
awakening the following morning, the individual has amnesia for the event (Criterion
D). The sleep terror episodes must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E). Sleep Terror
Disorder should not be diagnosed if the recurrent events are due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general
medical condition (Criterion F). Sleep terrors are also called "night terrors" or pavor
nocturnus.
During a typical episode, the individual abruptly sits up in bed screaming or crying,
with a frightened expression and autonomic signs of intense anxiety (e.g., tachycardia,
rapid breathing, flushing of the skin, sweating, dilation of the pupils, increased muscle
tone). The individual is usually unresponsive to the efforts of others to awaken or comfort
him or her. If awakened, the person is confused and disoriented for several minutes and
recounts a vague sense of terror, usually without dream content. Although fragmentary
vivid dream images may occur, a storylike dream sequence (as in nightmares) is not
reported. Most commonly, the individual does not awaken fully, but returns to sleep,
and has amnesia for the episode on awakening the next morning. Some individuals may584
Sleep Disorders
vaguely recall having an "episode" during the previous night, but do not have detailed
recall. Usually only one episode will occur on any one night, although occasionally
several episodes may occur at intervals throughout the night.
For the diagnosis to be made, the individual must experience clinically significant
distress or impairment. Embarrassment concerning the episodes can impair social
relationships. Individuals may avoid situations in which others might become aware of
the disturbance, such as going to camp, visiting friends overnight, or sleeping with
bedpartners.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. The episode is usually ac-
companied by yelling, screaming, crying, or incoherent vocalizations. The individual
may actively resist being held or touched, or even demonstrate more elaborate motor
activity (e.g., swinging, punching, rising from the bed, or fleeing). These behaviors
appear to represent attempts at self-protection or flight from a threat and may result in
physical injury. Episodes that simultaneously include features of sleep terror and
sleepwalking can occur. Alcohol or sedative use, sleep deprivation, sleep-wake schedule
disruptions, fatigue, and physical or emotional stress increase the likelihood of episodes.
Children with Sleep Terror Disorder do not have a higher incidence of psychopa-
thology or mental disorders than does the general population. Psychopathology is more
likely to be associated with Sleep Terror Disorder in adults. Sleep Terror Disorder may
occur with an increased frequency in individuals with Axis I disorders, particularly
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Generalized Anxiety Disorder. Personality Disorders
may occur in individuals with Sleep Terror Disorder, especially Dependent, Schizoid,
and Borderline Personality Disorders. Elevated scores for depression and anxiety have
been noted on personality inventories.
Associated laboratory findings. Sleep terrors begin during deep NREM sleep that
is characterized by slow-frequency EEG activity (delta). This EEG activity is most
prevalent during stages 3 and 4 NREM sleep, which are concentrated in the first third of
the major sleep episode. Therefore, sleep terrors are also most likely to occur in the first
third of the night. However, episodes can occur during slow-wave sleep at any time,
even during daytime naps. The onset of sleep terror episodes is typically heralded by
very high voltage EEG delta activity, an increase in muscle tone, and a twofold to fourfold
increase in heart rate, often to over 120 beats per minute. During the episode, the
polysomnogram may be obscured with movement artifact. In the absence of such artifact,
the EEG typically shows theta or alpha activity during the episode, indicating partial
arousal. Individuals with Sleep Terror Disorder may also have abrupt arousals from deep
NREM sleep that do not progress to full episodes of sleep terror. Such episodes can
include abrupt tachycardia.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Fever and sleep deprivation can produce an increased frequency of sleep terror episodes.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
No reports have provided clear evidence of culturally related differences in the
manifestations of Sleep Terror Disorder, although it is likely that the significance and307.46 Sleep Terror Disorder
585
cause attributed to sleep terror episodes will differ between cultures. Older children and
adults provide a more detailed recollection of fearful images associated with sleep terrors
than do younger children, who are more likely to have complete amnesia or to report
only a vague sense of fear. Among children, Sleep Terror Disorder is more common in
males than in females. Among adults, the sex ratio is even.
Prevalence
There are limited data on Sleep Terror Disorder in the general population. The
prevalence of sleep terror episodes (as opposed to Sleep Terror Disorder in which there
is recurrence and distress or impairment) has been estimated at l%-6% among children
and at less than 1% of adults.
Course
Sleep Terror Disorder usually begins in children between ages 4 and 12 years and
resolves spontaneously during adolescence. In adults, it most commonly begins between
ages 20 and 30 years and often follows a chronic course, with the frequency and severity
of episodes waxing and waning over time. The frequency of episodes varies both within
and among individuals. Episodes usually occur at intervals of days or weeks, but may
occur on consecutive nights.
Familial Pattern
Individuals with Sleep Terror Disorder frequently report a positive family history of either
sleep terrors or sleepwalking. Some studies indicate a tenfold increase in the prevalence
of the disorder among first-degree biological relatives. The exact mode of inheritance is
unknown.
Differential
Diagnosis
Many individuals suffer from isolated episodes of sleep terrors at some time in their lives.
The distinction between individual episodes of sleep terrors and Sleep Terror Disorder
rests on repeated occurrence, intensity, clinically significant impairment or distress, and
the potential for injury to self or others.
Sleep Terror Disorder must be differentiated from other disorders that produce
complete or partial awakenings at night or unusual behavior during sleep. The most
important differential diagnoses for Sleep Terror Disorder include Nightmare Disorder,
Sleepwalking Disorder, other parasomnias (see Parasomnia Not Otherwise Specified),
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, and seizures occurring during sleep. In contrast to
individuals with Sleep Terror Disorder, individuals with Nightmare Disorder typically
awaken easily and completely, report vivid storylike dreams accompanying the episodes,
and tend to have episodes later in the night. The degree of autonomic arousal and motor
activity is not as great as that in Sleep Terror Disorder, and recall is more complete.
Sleep terrors usually occur during slow-wave sleep, whereas nightmares occur during
REM sleep. Parents of children with Sleep Terror Disorder may misinterpret reports of
fearfulness and fragmentary imagery reports as nightmares.
Sleepwalking Disorder may be difficult to differentiate from cases of Sleep Terror586
Sleep Disorders
Disorder that involve prominent motor activity. In fact, the two disorders frequently
occur together, and family history commonly involves both disorders. The prototypical
case of Sleep Terror Disorder involves a predominance of autonomic arousal and fear,
with a lesser degree of motor activity that tends to be abrupt and disorganized. The
prototypical case of Sleepwalking Disorder involves little autonomic arousal or fear and
a greater degree of organized motor activity.
Parasomnias Not Otherwise Specified include several presentations that can
resemble Sleep Terror Disorder. The most common example is "REM sleep behavior
disorder," which also produces subjective fear, violent motor activity, and the potential
for injury. Because this occurs during REM sleep, it involves vivid storylike dreams, more
immediate and complete awakening, and motor activity that clearly follows dream
content. "Nocturnal paroxysmal dystonia" also includes awakenings from sleep with
motor activity, but this activity is longer in duration, more rhythmic and stereotyped,
and not associated with subjective reports or signs of fear.
Hypnagogic hallucinations, experienced sporadically by many otherwise-
asymptomatic individuals, as well as more regularly by those with Narcolepsy, may be
associated with anxiety. Their occurrence at sleep onset, vivid images, and subjective
sensation of wakefulness differentiate these episodes from sleep terrors.
Rarely, an individual with a Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder may have episodes
of awakenings associated with fear and panic that resemble those in Sleep Terror
Disorder. The association with snoring, obesity, and respiratory symptoms such as
witnessed apneas, an inability to breathe, or choking episodes distinguishes Breathing-
Related Sleep Disorder. A single episode of sleep terror can also occur during the
slow-wave sleep rebound that follows the abrupt treatment of obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome (e.g., following nasal continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP] therapy).
Seizures that occur during sleep can produce subjective sensations of fear and
stereotyped behaviors, followed by confusion and difficulty awakening. Most nocturnal
seizures occur at sleep-wake transitions, but they may occur during slow-wave sleep.
Incontinence and tonic-clonic movements suggest a seizure disorder, but frontal and
temporal lobe seizures can produce more complex behaviors as well. An EEG often
reveals interictal findings in individuals with sleep-related seizures, but EEG monitoring
during nocturnal sleep may be needed for definitive differential diagnosis. Sleep
disruption related to seizures should be diagnosed as Sleep Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition, Parasomnia Type (see p. 597). Sleep Disorders Due to a General
Medical Condition other than sleep-related seizures may rarely cause unusual behavioral
episodes at night. The new onset of abnormal behavior during sleep in a middle-aged
or older adult should prompt consideration of a closed head injury or central nervous
system pathology such as tumor or infection.
Sleep terror episodes also may be exacerbated or induced by medications such as
central nervous system depressants. If episodes are judged to be a direct physiological
effect of taking a medication or substance, the disorder should be classified as a
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder, Parasomnia Type (see p. 601).
Panic Disorder may also cause abrupt awakenings from deep NREM sleep
accompanied by fearfulness, but these episodes produce rapid and complete awakening
without the confusion, amnesia, or motor activity typical of Sleep Terror Disorder.
Individuals who have Panic Attacks during sleep report that these symptoms are virtually
identical to those of Panic Attacks that occur during the day. The presence of
Agoraphobia may also help differentiate the two disorders.307.46 Sleepwalking Disorder
587
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
Sleep Terror Disorder is virtually identical to Sleep Terrors in the International Classifi-
cation of Sleep Disorders (ICSD). Confusional Arousals, which can occur as an
independent disorder or in conjunction with Sleep Terror Disorder, are also described
in the ICSD. Confusional Arousals are characterized by brief awakenings from slow-wave
sleep with confusion, but without terror or ambulation.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.46 Sleep Terror Disorder
A. Recurrent episodes of abrupt awakening from sleep, usually occurring
during the first third of the major sleep episode and beginning with a
panicky scream.
B. Intense fear and signs of autonomic arousal, such as tachycardia, rapid
breathing, and sweating, during each episode.
C. Relative unresponsiveness to efforts of others to comfort the person
during the episode.
D. No detailed dream is recalled and there is amnesia for the episode.
E. The episodes cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
F. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
307.46 Sleepwalking Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Sleepwalking Disorder is repeated episodes of complex motor
behavior initiated during sleep, including rising from bed and walking about. Sleepwalk-
ing episodes begin during slow-wave sleep and therefore most often occur during the
first third of the night (Criterion A). During episodes, the individual has reduced alertness
and responsiveness, a blank stare, and relative unresponsiveness to communication with
others or efforts to be awakened by others (Criterion B). If awakened during the episode
(or on awakening the following morning), the individual has limited recall for the events
of the episode (Criterion C). After the episode, there may initially be a brief period of
confusion or difficulty orienting, followed by full recovery of cognitive function and
appropriate behavior (Criterion D). The sleepwalking must cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion E). Sleepwalking Disorder should not be diagnosed if the behavior is due to588
Sleep Disorders
the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a
general medical condition (Criterion F).
Sleepwalking episodes can include a variety of behaviors. In mild episodes
(sometimes called "confusional arousals"), the individual may simply sit up in bed, look
about, or pick at the blanket or sheet. More typically, the individual actually gets out of
bed and may walk into closets, out of the room, up and down stairs, and even out of
buildings. Individuals may use the bathroom, eat, and talk during episodes. Running
and frantic attempts to escape some apparent threat can also occur. Most behaviors
during sleepwalking episodes are routine and of low complexity. However, cases of
unlocking doors and even operating machinery have been reported. Particularly in
childhood, sleepwalking can also include inappropriate behavior (e.g., urinating in a
closet). Most episodes last for several minutes to a half hour.
Sleepwalking episodes can terminate in spontaneous arousals followed by a brief
period of confusion, or the individual may return to bed and continue to sleep until the
morning. Not uncommonly, the individual may awaken the next morning in another
place, or with evidence of having performed some activity during the night, but with
complete amnesia for the event. Some episodes may be followed by vague recall of
fragmentary dream images, but usually not by typical storylike dreams.
During sleepwalking episodes, individuals may talk or even respond to others'
questions. However, their articulation is poor, and true dialogue is rare. Individuals may
respond to others' requests to cease their activity and return to bed. However, these
behaviors are performed with reduced levels of alertness, and awakening an individual
from a sleepwalking episode is typically very difficult. If awakened, the individual
remains confused for several minutes and then returns to a normal state of alertness.
For the diagnosis to be made, the individual must experience clinically significant
distress or impairment. Individuals may avoid situations that would reveal their behavior
to others (e.g., children may avoid visiting friends or going to summer camp; adults may
avoid sleeping with bedpartners, going on vacation, or staying away from home). Social
isolation or occupational difficulties can result.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Internal stimuli (e.g., a
distended bladder) or external stimuli (e.g., noises) can increase the likelihood of
a sleepwalking episode, as can psychosocial stressors and alcohol or sedative use. Some
individuals with sleepwalking also report episodes of eating during the night, most often
with complete or partial amnesia. They may find evidence of their eating only the next
morning. Individuals can injure themselves during sleepwalking episodes by bumping
into objects, walking on stairs, going outside, and even walking out of windows. The
risk of injury further increases if sleepwalking episodes also include features of sleep
terrors, with an attendant fleeing or striking out. Individuals with Sleepwalking Disorder
and Sleep Terror Disorder can also injure others during episodes.
Other parasomnias associated with non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (e.g.,
Sleep Terror Disorder) can also occur in individuals with Sleepwalking Disorder.
Sleepwalking Disorder in children usually is not associated with other mental disorders,
but in adults it may be associated with Personality Disorders, Mood Disorders, or Anxiety
Disorders.307.46 Sleepwalking Disorder
589
Associated laboratory findings. Polysomnography, using routine procedures with
the addition of audiovisual monitoring, can document episodes of sleepwalking.
Episodes begin within the first few hours of sleep during deep (usually NREM stage
3 or 4) sleep. Some individuals (e.g., older adults) may have episodes during NREM
stage 2 sleep. Preceding the episode, the EEC often shows rhythmic ("hypersynchron-
ous"), high-voltage delta activity that persists during the arousal. EEC signs of arousal,
such as alpha activity, may also appear at the beginning of the episode. Most commonly,
the EEG is obscured by movement artifact during the actual episode. Heart rate and
respiratory rate may increase at the beginning of the episode. These findings may occur
with a full sleepwalking episode or with a more minor behavioral event (such as a
confusional arousal). Other polysomnographic findings may include an increased
number of transitions out of stages 3 and 4 sleep and reduced sleep efficiency.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Fever or sleep deprivation can increase the frequency of sleepwalking episodes.
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and other disorders that produce severe disruption
of slow-wave sleep can also be associated with sleepwalking episodes. An association
between migraine headaches and Sleepwalking Disorder has been noted.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
No reports have provided clear evidence of culturally related differences in the
manifestations of Sleepwalking Disorder, but it is likely that the significance and causes
attributed to sleepwalking differ among cultures. Violent activity during sleepwalking
episodes is more likely to occur in adults. Sleepwalking Disorder occurs with equal
frequency in both sexes.
Prevalence
Between 10% and 30% of children have had at least one episode of sleepwalking, but
the prevalence of Sleepwalking Disorder (marked by repeated episodes and impairment
or distress) is much lower, probably in the range of 1%—5%. Epidemiological surveys
report the prevalence of sleepwalking episodes (not Sleepwalking Disorder) to be
1.0%-7.0% among adults.
Course
Sleepwalking can occur at any time after a child is able to walk, but episodes most
commonly occur for the first time between ages 4 and 8 years. The peak prevalence
occurs at about age 12 years. Episodes rarely occur for the first time in adults. The onset
of Sleepwalking Disorder in adults should prompt a search for specific etiologies such
as substance use or a neurological condition. Sleepwalking in childhood usually
disappears spontaneously during early adolescence, typically by age 15 years. Less
commonly, episodes may have a recurrent course, with return of episodes in early
adulthood after cessation of episodes in late childhood. Sleepwalking Disorder is adults
most often follows a chronic, waxing and waning course. Sleepwalking episodes may
occur as isolated events in individuals of any age, but the most common pattern is
repeated episodes occurring over a period of several years.590
Sleep Disorders
Familial Pattern
Sleepwalking Disorder aggregates among family members. A family history for sleep-
walking or sleep terrors has been reported in up to 80% of individuals who sleepwalk.
Approximately 10%-20% of individuals who sleepwalk have a first-degree biological
relative who also sleepwalks. The risk for sleepwalking is further increased (to as much
as 60% of offspring) when both parents have a history of the disorder. Genetic
transmission is suggested, but the exact mode of inheritance is not known.
Differential
Diagnosis
Many children have isolated or infrequent episodes of sleepwalking, either with or
without precipitating events. The exact boundary between nonclinically significant
sleepwalking episodes and Sleepwalking Disorder is indistinct. Frequent episodes,
injuries, more active or violent behavior, and social impairment resulting from sleep-
walking are likely to lead the child's parents to seek help and warrant a diagnosis of
Sleepwalking Disorder. Episodes that have persisted from childhood to late adolescence,
or that occur de novo in adults, are more likely to warrant a diagnosis of Sleepwalking
Disorder.
It can be difficult clinically to distinguish Sleepwalking Disorder from Sleep Terror
Disorder when there is an attempt to "escape" from the terrifying stimulus. In both
cases, the individual shows movement, difficulty awakening, and amnesia for the event.
An initial scream, signs of intense fear and panic, and autonomic arousal are more
characteristic of Sleep Terror Disorder. Sleepwalking Disorder and Sleep Terror Disorder
may occur in the same individual, and in such cases both should be diagnosed.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, especially the obstructive sleep apnea syn-
drome, can also produce confusional arousals with subsequent amnesia. However,
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder is also characterized by characteristic symptoms of
snoring, breathing pauses, and daytime sleepiness. In some individuals, Breathing-
Related Sleep Disorder may precipitate episodes of sleepwalking.
"REM sleep behavior disorder" is another Parasomnia (see Parasomnia Not
Otherwise Specified) that may be difficult to distinguish from Sleepwalking Disorder.
REM sleep behavior disorder is characterized by episodes of prominent, complex
movements, often involving personal injury. In contrast to Sleepwalking Disorder, REM
sleep behavior disorder occurs during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, often in the
later part of the night. Individuals awaken easily and report dream content that matches
their behaviors. A variety of other behaviors can occur with partial arousals from sleep.
Confusional arousals resemble sleepwalking episodes in all respects except the actual
movement out of the bed. "Sleep drunkenness" is a state in which the individual shows
a prolonged transition from sleep to wakefulness in the morning. It may be difficult to
arouse the individual, who may violently resist efforts to awaken him or her. Again,
ambulation or other more complex behaviors distinguish Sleepwalking Disorder.
However, both confusional arousals and sleep drunkenness may occur in individuals
with Sleepwalking Disorder.
Sleep-related epilepsy can produce episodes of unusual behavior that occur only
during sleep. The individual is unresponsive and is amnestic for the episode. Typically,
sleep-related epilepsy produces more stereotypical, perseverative, low-complexity
movements than those in sleepwalking. In most cases, individuals with sleep-related
epilepsy also have similar episodes during wakefulness. The EEG shows features of307.46 Sleepwalking Disorder
591
epilepsy, including paroxysmal activity during the episodes and interictal features at
other times. However, the presence of sleep-related seizures does not preclude the
presence of sleepwalking episodes. Sleep-related epilepsy should be diagnosed as Sleep
Disorder Due to Epilepsy, Parasomnia Type (see p. 597).
Sleepwalking can be induced by substances or medications (e.g., antipsychotics,
tricyclic antidepressants, chloral hydrate). In such cases, Substance-Induced Sleep
Disorder, Parasomnia Type, should be diagnosed (see p. 601).
Dissociative Fugue bears superficial similarities to Sleepwalking Disorder. Fugue
is rare in children, typically begins when the individual is awake, lasts hours or days,
and is not characterized by disturbances of consciousness. Although individuals can
feign sleepwalking as part of Malingering, it is difficult to counterfeit the appearance
or behavior of sleepwalking under direct observation.
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
Sleepwalking Disorder is virtually identical to Sleepwalking as described in the Interna-
tional Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD). The ICSD includes two other disorders
that may have features similar to sleepwalking: Confusional Arousals and Nocturnal
Eating (Drinking) Syndrome.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.46 Sleepwalking Disorder
A. Repeated episodes of rising from bed during sleep and walking about,
usually occurring during the first third of the major sleep episode.
B. While sleepwalking, the person has a blank, staring face, is relatively
unresponsive to the efforts of others to communicate with him or her,
and can be awakened only with great difficulty.
C. On awakening (either from the sleepwalking episode or the next
morning), the person has amnesia for the episode.
D. Within several minutes after awakening from the sleepwalking episode,
there is no impairment of mental activity or behavior (although there
may initially be a short period of confusion or disorientation).
E. The sleepwalking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
F. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.592
Sleep Disorders
307.47 Parasomnia Not Otherwise Specified
The Parasomnia Not Otherwise Specified category is for disturbances that are character-
ized by abnormal behavioral or physiological events during sleep or sleep-wake
transitions, but that do not meet criteria for a more specific Parasomnia. Examples include
1. REM sleep behavior disorder: motor activity, often of a violent nature, that arises
during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Unlike sleepwalking, these episodes
tend to occur later in the night and are associated with vivid dream recall.
2. Sleep paralysis: an inability to perform voluntary movement during the transition
between wakefulness and sleep. The episodes may occur at sleep onset
(hypnagogic) or with awakening (hypnopompic). The episodes are usually
associated with extreme anxiety and, in some cases, fear of impending death.
Sleep paralysis occurs commonly as an ancillary symptom of Narcolepsy and, in
such cases, should not be coded separately.
3. Situations in which the clinician has concluded that a Parasomnia is present but
is unable to determine whether it is primary, due to a general medical condition,
or substance induced.
sleep disorders related to another mental disorder
307.42 Insomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder
307.44 Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Insomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder and Hypersomnia
Related to Another Mental Disorder is the presence of either insomnia or hypersomnia
that is judged to be related temporally and causally to another mental disorder. Insomnia
or Hypersomnia that is the direct physiological consequence of a substance is not
included here. Such presentations would be diagnosed as Substance-Induced Sleep
Disorder (see p. 601). Insomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder is characterized by
a complaint of difficulty falling asleep, frequent awakenings during the night, or a marked
feeling of nonrestorative sleep that has lasted for at least 1 month and is associated with
daytime fatigue or impaired daytime functioning (Criterion A). Hypersomnia Related to
Another Mental Disorder is characterized by a complaint of either prolonged nighttime
sleep or repeated daytime sleep episodes for at least 1 month (Criterion A). In both
Insomnia and Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder, the sleep symptoms
cause significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning (Criterion B). The insomnia or hypersomnia is not better accounted for
by another Sleep Disorder (e.g., Narcolepsy, Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, or a
Parasomnia) and hypersomnia is not better accounted for by an inadequate amount of
sleep (Criterion D). The sleep disturbance must not be due to the direct physiological
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition
(Criterion E).
Sleep disturbances are common features of other mental disorders. An additionalInsomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder
593
diagnosis of Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder is made only
when the sleep disturbance is a predominant complaint and is sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention (Criterion C). Individuals with this type of
insomnia or hypersomnia usually focus on their sleep disturbance to the exclusion of
the symptoms characteristic of the related mental disorder, whose presence may become
apparent only after specific and persistent questioning. Not infrequently, they attribute
their symptoms of mental disorder to the fact that they have slept poorly.
Many mental disorders may at times involve insomnia or hypersomnia as the
predominant problems. Individuals with Major Depressive Disorder often complain of
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep or early morning awakening with inability to
return to sleep. Hypersomnia Related to Mood Disorder is more often associated with
Bipolar Mood Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, or a Major Depressive Episode
With Atypical Features. Individuals with Generalized Anxiety Disorder often report
difficulty falling asleep and may awaken with anxious ruminations in the middle of the
night. Some individuals with Panic Disorder have nocturnal Panic Attacks that can lead
to insomnia. Significant insomnia is often seen during exacerbations of Schizophrenia
and other Psychotic Disorders but is rarely the predominant complaint. Other mental
disorders that may be related to insomnia include Adjustment Disorders, Somatoform
Disorders, and Personality Disorders.
Recording Procedures
The name of the diagnosis begins with the type of sleep disturbance (i.e., insomnia or
hypersomnia) followed by the name of the specific Axis I or Axis II disorder that it is
related to (e.g., 307.42 Insomnia Related to Major Depressive Disorder) on Axis I. The
specific related mental disorder should also be coded on Axis I or Axis II as appropriate.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Because, by definition,
the criteria are met for the related mental disorder, the associated features of Insomnia
or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder include the characteristic and
associated features of the related mental disorder.
Individuals with Insomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder may demonstrate the
same type of conditioned arousal and negative conditioning that individuals with Primary
Insomnia demonstrate. For instance, they will note increased anxiety as bedtime
approaches, improved sleep when taken out of the usual sleep environment, and a
tendency to spend too much time in bed. They may also have a history of multiple or
inappropriate medication treatments for their insomnia complaints. Individuals with
Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder will frequently emphasize symptoms
of fatigue, "leaden paralysis," or complete lack of energy. On careful questioning, these
individuals may be more distressed by such fatigue-related symptoms than by true
sleepiness. They may also have a history of inappropriate use of stimulant medications,
including caffeine.
Associated laboratory findings. Characteristic (but not diagnostic) polysomno-
graphic findings in Major Depressive Episode include 1) sleep continuity disturbance,
such as prolonged sleep latency, increased intermittent wakefulness, and early morning594
Sleep Disorders
awakening; 2) reduced non-rapid eye movement (NREM) stages 3 and 4 sleep
(slow-wave sleep), with a shift in slow-wave activity away from the first NREM period;
3) decreased rapid eye movement (REM) latency (i.e., shorter duration of the first NREM
period); 4) increased REM density (i.e., the number of actual eye movements during
REM); and 5) increased duration of REM sleep early in the night. Sleep abnormalities
may be evident in 40%-60% of outpatients and in up to 90% of inpatients with a Major
Depressive Episode. Evidence suggests that most of these abnormalities persist after
clinical remission and may precede the onset of the initial Major Depressive Episode.
Polysomnographic findings in Manic Episodes are similar to those found in Major
Depressive Episodes. In Schizophrenia, REM sleep is diminished early in the course of
an acute exacerbation, with a gradual return toward normal values as clinical status
improves. REM latency may be reduced. Total sleep time is often severely diminished
in Schizophrenia, and slow-wave sleep is typically reduced during exacerbations.
Individuals with Panic Disorder may have paroxysmal awakenings on entering stages
3 and 4 NREM sleep; these awakenings are accompanied by tachycardia, increased
respiratory rate, and cognitive and emotional symptoms with Panic Attacks. Most other
mental disorders produce nonspecific patterns of sleep disturbance (e.g., prolonged
sleep latency or frequent awakenings).
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Individuals with Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder may
appear tired, fatigued, or haggard during routine examination. The general medical
conditions associated with these Sleep Disorders are the same as those associated with
the underlying mental disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
In some cultures, sleep complaints may be viewed as relatively less stigmatizing than
mental disorders. Therefore, individuals from some cultural backgrounds may be more
likely to present with complaints of insomnia or hypersomnia rather than with other
symptoms (e.g., depression, anxiety).
Children and adolescents with Major Depressive Disorder generally present with
less subjective sleep disturbance and fewer polysomnographic changes than do older
adults. In general, hypersomnia is a more common feature of Depressive Disorders in
adolescents and young adults and insomnia is more common in older adults.
Sleep Disorders Related to Another Mental Disorder are more prevalent in females
than in males. This difference probably relates to the increased prevalence of Mood and
Anxiety Disorders in women, rather than to any particular difference in susceptibility to
sleep problems.
Prevalence
Sleep problems are extremely common in all types of mental disorders, but there are
no accurate estimates of the percentage of individuals who present primarily because
of sleep disruption. Insomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder is the most frequent
diagnosis (35%-50%) among individuals presenting to sleep disorders centers for
evaluation of chronic insomnia. Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder is a
much less frequent diagnosis (fewer than 5%) among individuals evaluated for
hypersomnia at sleep disorders centers.Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder
595
Course
The course of Sleep Disorders Related to Another Mental Disorder generally follows the
course of the underlying mental disorder itself. The sleep disturbance may be one of
the earliest symptoms to appear in individuals who subsequently develop an associated
mental disorder. Symptoms of insomnia or hypersomnia often fluctuate considerably
over time. For many individuals with depression, particularly those treated with
medications, sleep disturbance may improve rapidly, often more quickly than other
symptoms of the underlying mental disorder. On the other hand, other individuals have
persistent or intermittent insomnia even after the other symptoms of their Major
Depressive Disorder remit. Individuals with Bipolar Disorder often have distinctive
sleep-related symptoms depending on the nature of the current episode. During Manic
Episodes, individuals experience hyposomnia, although they rarely complain about their
inability to sleep. On the other hand, such individuals may have marked distress about
hypersomnia during Major Depressive Episodes. Individuals with Psychotic Disorders
most often have a notable worsening in sleep early during the course of an acute
exacerbation, but then report improvement as psychotic symptoms abate.
Differential Diagnosis
Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder should not be diagnosed
in every individual with a mental disorder who also has sleep-related symptoms.
A diagnosis of Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder should be
made only when sleep symptoms are severe and are an independent focus of clinical
attention. No independent sleep disorder diagnosis is warranted for most individuals
with Major Depressive Disorder who report difficulties falling or staying asleep in the
middle of the night. However, if the individual primarily complains of sleep disturbance
or if the insomnia is out of propoition to other symptoms, then an additional diagnosis
of Insomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder may be warranted.
Distinguishing Primary Insomnia or Primary Hypersomnia from Insomnia or
Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder can be especially difficult in individuals
who present with both clinically significant sleep disturbance and other symptoms of a
mental disorder. The diagnosis of Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental
Disorder is based on three judgments. First, the insomnia or hypersomnia must be judged
to be attributable to the mental disorder (e.g., the insomnia or hypersomnia occurs
exclusively during the mental disorder). Second, the insomnia or hypersomnia must be
the predominant complaint and must be sufficiently severe to warrant independent
clinical attention. Third, the symptom presentation should meet the full criteria for
another mental disorder. A diagnosis of Primary Insomnia or Primary Hypersomnia is
appropriate when (as is often the case) the insomnia or hypersomnia is accompanied
by symptoms (e.g., anxiety, depressed mood) that do not meet criteria for a specific
mental disorder. A diagnosis of Primary Insomnia is also appropriate for individuals with
chronic insomnia who later develop a Mood or Anxiety Disorder. If symptoms of
insomnia or hypersomnia persist long after the other symptoms of the related mental
disorder have remitted completely, the diagnosis would be changed from Insomnia or
Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder to Primary Insomnia or Primary
Hypersomnia.
Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder is not diagnosed if596
Sleep Disorders
the presentation is better accounted for by another Sleep Disorder (e.g.. Narcolepsy,
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, or a Parasomnia).
Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder must be distinguished
from a Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. The diagnosis is Sleep
Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition when the sleep disturbance is judged to
be a direct physiological consequence of a specific general medical condition (e.g.,
pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism). This determination is based on history, labora-
tory findings, and physical examination (see p. 597 for further discussion). A Substance-
Induced Sleep Disorder is distinguished from Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to
Another Mental Disorder by the fact that a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication)
is judged to be etiologically related to the sleep disturbance (see p. 601 for further
discussion). For example, insomnia that occurs only in the context of heavy coffee
consumption would be diagnosed as Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder, Insomnia Type.
Sleep Disorders Related to Another Mental Disorder must be differentiated from
normal sleep patterns, as well as from other Sleep Disorders. Although complaints of
occasional insomnia or hypersomnia are common in the general population, they are
not usually accompanied by the other signs and symptoms of a mental disorder. Transient
sleep disturbances are common reactions to stressful life events and generally do not
warrant a diagnosis. A separate diagnosis of Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to
Adjustment Disorder should be considered only when the sleep disturbance is particu-
larly severe and prolonged.
Relationship to the International
Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD) includes analogous diagnoses
for Sleep Disorders Related to Another Mental Disorder and specifically lists Psychoses,
Mood Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, Panic Disorder, and Alcoholism.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.42 Insomnia Related to ...
[Indicate the Axis I or Axis II disorder]
A. The predominant complaint is difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep,
or nonrestorative sleep, for at least 1 month that is associated with
daytime fatigue or impaired daytime functioning.
B. The sleep disturbance (or daytime sequelae) causes clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning.
C. The insomnia is judged to be related to another Axis I or Axis II disorder
(e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Adjust-
ment Disorder With Anxiety), but is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
(continued)780.xx Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
597
D Diagnostic criteria for 307.42 Insomnia Related to ...
[Indicate the Axis I or Axis 11 Disorder] (continued)
D. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another Sleep Disorder
(e.g., Narcolepsy, Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, a Parasomnia).
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
Diagnostic criteria for 307.44 Hypersomnia Related
to ... [Indicate the Axis I or Axis II disorder]
A. The predominant complaint is excessive sleepiness for at least 1 month
as evidenced by either prolonged sleep episodes or daytime sleep
episodes that occur almost daily.
B. The excessive sleepiness causes clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The hypersomnia is judged to be related to another Axis I or Axis II
disorder (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic Disorder), but is
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
D. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another Sleep Disorder
(e.g., Narcolepsy, Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, a Parasomnia) or
by an inadequate amount of sleep.
E. The disturbance is not clue to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
Other Sleep Disorders
780.xx Sleep Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is a
prominent disturbance in sleep that is severe enough to warrant independent clinical
attention (Criterion A) and is clue to a general medical condition. Symptoms may include598
Sleep Disorders
insomnia, hypersomnia, a Parasomnia, or some combination of these. There must be
evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the sleep
disturbance is the direct physiological consequence of a general medical condition
(Criterion B). The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder,
such as Adjustment Disorder, in which the stressor is a serious general medical condition
(Criterion C). The diagnosis is not made if the sleep disturbance occurs only during the
course of a delirium (Criterion D). By convention, sleep disturbances due to a
Sleep-Related Breathing Disorder (e.g., sleep apnea) or to Narcolepsy are not included
in this category (Criterion E). The sleep symptoms must cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion F).
In determining whether the sleep disturbance is due to a general medical condition,
the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical condition. Further,
the clinician must establish that the sleep disturbance is etiologically related to the general
medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and comprehensive
assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make this judgment. Although there are
no infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the sleep
disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological, several considerations
provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a temporal
association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general medical
condition and that of the sleep disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of
features that are atypical of primary Sleep Disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course
or absence of family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can
be a direct association between the general medical condition in question and the
development of a sleep disturbance can provide a useful context in the assessment of
a particular situation. In addition, the clinician must also judge that the disturbance is
not better accounted for by a primary Sleep Disorder, a Substance-Induced Sleep
Disorder, or other primary mental disorders (e.g., Adjustment Disorder). This determi-
nation is explained in greater detail in the "Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical
Condition" section (p. 165).
Subtypes
The subtypes listed below can be used to indicate which of the following symptom
presentations predominates. The clinical presentation of the specific Sleep Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition may resemble that of the analogous primary Sleep
Disorder. However, the full criteria for the analogous primary Sleep Disorder do not
need to be met to assign a diagnosis of Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition.
Insomnia Type. This subtype refers to a sleep complaint characterized primar-
ily by difficulty falling asleep, difficulty maintaining sleep, or a feeling of
nonrestorative sleep.
Hypersomnia Type. This subtype is used when the predominant complaint is
one of excessively long nocturnal sleep or of excessive sleepiness during waking
hours.
Parasomnia Type. This subtype refers to a sleep disturbance characterized
primarily by abnormal behavioral events that occur in association with sleep or
sleep transitions.780.XX Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
599
Mixed Type. This subtype should be used to designate a sleep problem due to
a general medical condition characterized by multiple sleep symptoms but no
symptom clearly predominates.
Recording Procedures
In recording the diagnosis of Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition, the
clinician should note both the specific phenomenology of the disturbance, including the
appropriate subtype, and the specific general medical condition judged to be causing
the disturbance on Axis I (e.g., 780.52 Sleep Disorder Due to Thyrotoxicosis, Insomnia
Type). The ICD-9-CM code for the general medical condition should also be noted on
Axis III (e.g., 242.9 thyrotoxicosis). (See Appendix G for a list of selected ICD-9-CM
diagnostic codes for general medical conditions.)
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated laboratory findings. Laboratory findings are consistent with the under-
lying general medical condition. There are no polysomnographic findings that are
specific to the entire group of Sleep Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition. Most
general medical conditions cause a decrease in total sleep duration, an increase in
awakenings, a decrease in slow-wave sleep, and (less consistently) a decrease in rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep or phasic REM density. Some medical conditions produce
more specific polysomnographic findings. For example, individuals with fibromyalgia
syndrome complain of nonrestorative sleep and often have a distinct pattern of alpha
EEG activity during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. Sleep-related seizures result
in specific EEG discharges that are consistent with the underlying seizure type.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Individuals with a Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition are expected to
have the typical physical findings of the underlying general medical condition. Sleep
disturbances may result from a variety of general medical and neurological conditions
including (but not limited to) degenerative neurological illnesses (e.g., Parkinson's
disease, Huntington's disease), cerebrovascular disease (e.g., insomnia following vascu-
lar lesions to the upper brain stem), endocrine conditions (e.g., hypo- or hyperthyroid-
ism, hypo- or hyperadrenocorticism), viral and bacterial infections (e.g., hypersomnia
related to viral encephalitis), coughing related to pulmonary disease other than
sleep-related breathing conditions (e.g., chronic bronchitis), and pain from musculoskel-
etal disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia).
Differential
Diagnosis
Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition must be differentiated from expected
disruptions in sleep patterns, primary Sleep Disorders, Sleep Disorders Related to
Another Mental Disorder, and Substance-Induced Sleep Disorders. Many individuals
experience sleep disruption during the course of a general medical or neurolog-
ical condition. In the majority of cases, such complaints do not merit an additional
diagnosis of a Sleep Disorder. Rather, a diagnosis of Sleep Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition should be reserved for cases in which the sleep disturbance is a very
prominent clinical feature, atypical symptoms are present, or the individual is sufficiently600
Sleep Disorders
distressed by the sleep symptom or attendant impairment that specific treatment for this
disturbance is required.
Sleep Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition are characterized by symptoms
similar to those in primary Sleep Disorders. The differential diagnosis rests not on
specific symptoms, but rather on the presence or absence of a medical condition judged
to be etiologically related to the sleep complaint. In the specific cases of Narcolepsy
and Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder, the underlying etiology of the sleep distur-
bance is assumed to be a general medical condition. However, in these two specific
examples, the general medical condition does not exist independent of sleep symptoms.
For this reason, these two disorders are included in the "Primary Sleep Disorders" section.
Differentiating a Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition from Sub-
stance-Induced Sleep Disorder can prove very difficult. In many cases, individuals
with a significant general medical condition often take medication for that condition;
these medications in turn may cause sleep-related symptoms. For example, an individual
may have sleep disruption related to asthma. However, that individual may also be
treated with theophylline preparations, which in some cases can themselves cause sleep
disturbance. Differentiating a Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition from
a Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder often rests on chronology, response to treatment
or discontinuation of medications, and longitudinal course. In some cases, concurrent
diagnoses of Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced
Sleep Disorder may be appropriate. In cases in which a drug of abuse is suspected to
be the cause for the Sleep Disorder, a urine or blood drug screen may help to differentiate
this problem from a Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition.
If the clinician cannot determine whether the sleep disturbance is primary, related
to another mental disorder, due to a general medical condition, or substance induced,
the appropriate diagnosis is Dyssomnia or Parasomnia Not Otherwise Specified.
Relationship to the International Classification of Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD) contains the general section
"Medical/Psychiatric Sleep Disorders." Specific diagnoses are presented for Sleep
Disorders that are associated with neurological disorders (with 7 examples listed) and
Sleep Disorders that are associated with other medical disorders (with 7 examples listed).
Although only 14 medical/neurological disorders are specifically cited in the ICSD, the
clinician may diagnose a Sleep Disorder associated with any other medical disorder
simply by using the appropriate ICD-9-CM codes.
Diagnostic criteria for 780.xx Sleep Disorder
Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. A prominent disturbance in sleep that is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings that the sleep disturbance is the direct physiological conse-
quence of a general medical condition.
(continued)Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
601
D Diagnostic criteria for 780.xx Sleep Disorder Due to ...
[indicate the General Medical Condition] (continued)
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
(e.g., an Adjustment Disorder in which the stressor is a serious medical
illness).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E. The disturbance does not meet the criteria for Breathing-Related Sleep
Disorder or Narcolepsy.
F. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify type:
.52 Insomnia Type: if the predominant sleep disturbance is insomnia
.54 Hypersomnia Type: if the predominant sleep disturbance is
hypersomnia
.59 Parasomnia Type: if the predominant sleep disturbance is a
Parasomnia
.59 Mixed Type: if more than one sleep disturbance is present and none
predominates
Coding note: Include the name of the general medical condition on Axis I, e.g.,
780.52 Sleep Disorder Due to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Insomnia
Type; also code the general medical condition on Axis III (see Appendix G for
codes).
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder is a prominent disturbance
in sleep that is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention (Criterion A)
and is judged to be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (i.e., a drug of
abuse, a medication, or toxin exposure) (Criterion B). Depending on the substance
involved, one of four types of sleep disturbance may be noted. Insomnia and
Hypersomnia Types are most common, and Parasomnia Type is seen less often. A Mixed
Type may also be noted when more than one type of sleep disturbance is present and
none predominates. The disturbance must not be better accounted for by a mental
disorder (e.g., another Sleep Disorder) that is not substance induced (Criterion C). The
diagnosis is not made if the sleep disturbance occurs only during the course of a delirium
(Criterion D). The symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E). This diagnosis
should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal
only when the symptoms are in excess of those usually associated with the intoxication602
Sleep Disorders
or withdrawal syndrome and when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention. For a more detailed discussion of Substance-Related
Disorders, see p. 175.
A Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder is distinguished from a primary Sleep Disorder
and from Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder by considering
the onset and course. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory findings of intoxication or withdrawal. Substance-
Induced Sleep Disorder arises only in association with intoxication or withdrawal states,
whereas the primary Sleep Disorders may precede the onset of substance use or occur
during times of sustained abstinence. Because the withdrawal state for some substances
(e.g., some benzodiazepines) can be relatively protracted, the onset of the sleep
disturbance can occur up to 4 weeks after cessation of substance use. Another
consideration is the presence of features that are atypical of primary Sleep Disorders
(e.g., atypical age at onset or course). In contrast, factors that suggest that the sleep
disturbance is better accounted for by a primary Sleep Disorder include persistence of
the sleep disturbance for more than about 4 weeks after the end of intoxication or acute
withdrawal; the development of symptoms that are substantially in excess of what would
be expected given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use; or
a history of a prior primary Sleep Disorder.
Subtypes and Specifiers
The subtypes listed below can be used to indicate which of the following symptom
presentations predominates. The clinical presentation of the specific Substance-Induced
Sleep Disorder may resemble that of the analogous primary Sleep Disorder. However,
the full criteria for the analogous primary Sleep Disorder do not need to be met to assign
a diagnosis of Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder.
Insomnia Type. This subtype refers to a sleep complaint characterized primar-
ily by difficulty falling asleep, difficulty maintaining sleep, or a feeling of
nonrestorative sleep.
Hypersomnia Type. This subtype is used when the predominant complaint is
one of excessively long nocturnal sleep or of excessive sleepiness during waking
hours.
Parasomnia Type. This subtype refers to a sleep disturbance characterized
primarily by abnormal behavioral events that occur in association with sleep or
sleep-wake transitions.
Mixed Type. This subtype should be used to designate a substance-induced
sleep problem characterized by multiple types of sleep symptoms but no
symptom clearly predominates.
The context of the development of the sleep symptoms may be indicated by using
one of the following specifiers:
With Onset During Intoxication. This specifier should be used if criteria are
met for intoxication with the substance and symptoms develop during the
intoxication syndrome.
With Onset During Withdrawal. This specifier should be used if criteria are
met for withdrawal from the substance and the symptoms develop during, or
shortly after, a withdrawal syndrome.Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
603
Recording Procedures
The name of the Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder begins with the specific substance
(e.g., alcohol, methylphenidate, thyroxine) that is presumed to be causing the sleep
disturbance. The diagnostic code is selected from the listing of classes of substances
provided in the criteria set for Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder. For substances that
do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., thyroxine), the code for "Other Substance" should
be used. In addition, for medications prescribed at therapeutic doses, the specific
medication can be indicated by listing the appropriate E-code (see Appendix G). The
name of the disorder (e.g., Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder) is followed by the subtype
indicating the predominant symptom presentation and the specifier indicating the
context in which the symptoms developed (e.g., 292.89 Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder,
Insomnia Type, With Onset During Intoxication). When more than one substance is
judged to play a significant role in the development of the sleep disturbance, each should
be listed separately (e.g., 292.89 Cocaine-Induced Sleep Disorder, Insomnia Type, With
Onset During Intoxication; 291.8 Alcohol-Induced Sleep Disorder, Insomnia Type, With
Onset During Withdrawal). If a substance is judged to be the etiological factor but the
specific substance or class of substance is unknown, the category 292.89 Unknown
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder may be used.
Specific Substances
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder most commonly occurs during intoxication with the
following classes of substances: alcohol; amphetamine and related substances; caffeine;
cocaine; opioids; and sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics. Sleep disturbances are also
seen less commonly with use of other types of substances. Substance-Induced Sleep
Disorder can also occur in association with withdrawal from the following classes of
substances: alcohol; amphetamine and related stimulants; cocaine; opioids; and seda-
tives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics. Each of the Substance-Induced Sleep Disorders
produces EEG sleep patterns that are associated with, but cannot be considered
diagnostic of, the disorder. The EEG sleep profile for each substance is further related
to the stage of use, whether intoxication, chronic use, or withdrawal following
discontinuation of the substance.
Alcohol. Alcohol-Induced Sleep Disorder typically occurs as the Insomnia Type.
During acute intoxication, alcohol typically produces an immediate sedative effect, with
increased sleepiness and reduced wake fulness for 3-4 hours. This is accompanied by
an increase in stages 3 and 4 non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep and reduced rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep during EEG sleep studies. Following these initial effects, the
individual has increased wakefulness, restless sleep, and, often, vivid and anxiety-laden
dreams for the rest of the sleep period. EEG sleep studies show that, in the second half
of sleep after alcohol ingestion, stages 3 and 4 sleep is reduced, wakefulness is increased,
and REM sleep is increased. Alcohol can aggravate Breathing-Related Sleep DisorA
increasing the number of obstructive apnea events. With continued habitual uA
continues to show a short-lived sedative effect for several hours, followed by sleep
continuity disruption for several hours.
During Alcohol Withdrawal, sleep is grossly disturbed. The individual typically has
extremely disrupted sleep continuity, accompanied by an increase in the amount and
intensity of REM sleep. This is often accompanied by an increase in vivid dreaming and,604
Sleep Disorders
in the most extreme example, constitutes part of Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium. After
acute withdrawal, individuals who have chronically used alcohol may continue to
complain of light, fragmented sleep for weeks to years. EEG sleep studies confirm a
persistent deficit in slow-wave sleep and persistent sleep continuity disturbance in these
cases.
Amphetamines and related stimulants. Amphetamine-Induced Sleep Disorder is
characterized by insomnia during intoxication and by hypersomnia during withdrawal.
During the period of acute intoxication, amphetamine reduces the total amount of sleep,
increases sleep latency and sleep continuity disturbances, increases body movements,
and decreases REM sleep. Slow-wave sleep tends to be reduced. During withdrawal
from chronic amphetamine use, individuals typically experience hypersomnia, with both
prolonged nocturnal sleep duration and excessive sleepiness during the daytime. REM
and slow-wave sleep may rebound to above baseline values. Multiple Sleep Latency
Tests (MSLTs) may show increased daytime sleepiness during the withdrawal phase as
well.
Caffeine. Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder typically produces insomnia, although
some individuals may present with a complaint of hypersomnia and daytime sleepiness
related to withdrawal (see p. 708). Caffeine exerts a dose-dependent effect, with
increasing doses causing increased wakefulness and decreased sleep continuity. Poly-
somnography may show prolonged sleep latency, increased wakefulness, and a decrease
in slow-wave sleep. Consistent effects on REM sleep have not been described. Abrupt
withdrawal from chronic caffeine use can produce hypersomnia. Some individuals may
also experience hypersomnia between daytime doses of caffeine, as the immediate
stimulant effect wanes.
Cocaine. As with other stimulants, cocaine typically produces insomnia during acute
intoxication and hypersomnia during withdrawal. During acute intoxication, the total
amount of sleep may be drastically reduced, with only short bouts of very disrupted
sleep. Conversely, withdrawal after a cocaine binge is often associated with extremely
prolonged sleep duration.
Opioids. During acute short-term use, opioids typically produce an increase in
sleepiness and in subjective depth of sleep. REM sleep is typically reduced by acute
administration of opioids, with little overall change in wakefulness or total sleep time.
With continued administration, most individuals become tolerant to the sedative effects
of opioids and may begin to complain of insomnia. This is mirrored by increased
wakefulness and decreased sleep time in polysomnographic studies. Withdrawal from
opioids is typically accompanied by hypersomnia complaints, although few objective
studies have documented this finding.
Sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics. Drugs within this class (e.g., barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, meprobamate, glutethimide, and methyprylon) have similar, but not
identical, effects on sleep. Differences in duration of action and half-life may affect sleep
complaints and objective measures of sleep. In general, barbiturates and the older
nonbarbiturate, nonbenzodiazepine drugs more consistently produce tolerance, depen-
dence, and severe withdrawal, but these phenomena can be noted with benzodiazepines
as well.Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
605
During acute intoxication, sedative-hypnotic drugs produce the expected increase
in sleepiness and decrease in wakefulness. Polysomnographic studies confirm these
subjective effects during acute administration, as well as a decrease in REM sleep and
an increase in sleep-spindle activity. Chronic use (particularly of barbiturates and the
older nonbarbiturate, nonbenzodiazepine drugs) may cause tolerance with the resulting
return of insomnia. If the individual then increases the dose, daytime hypersomnia may
occur. Sedative-hypnotic drugs can aggravate Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder by
increasing the frequency and severity of obstructive sleep apnea events.
The abrupt discontinuation of chronic sedative-hypnotic use can lead to withdrawal
insomnia. In addition to decreased sleep duration, withdrawal can produce increased
anxiety, tremulousness, and ataxia. Barbiturates and the older nonbarbiturate, non-
benzodiazepine drugs are also associated with a high incidence of withdrawal seizures,
which are much less frequently observed with benzodiazepines. Typically, sedative-
hypnotic drugs with short durations of action are most likely to produce complaints of
withdrawal insomnia, whereas those with longer durations of action are more often
associated with daytime hypersomnia during active use. However, any sedative-hypnotic
drug can potentially cause either daytime sedation or withdrawal insomnia. Withdrawal
from sedative-hypnotic agents can be confirmed by polysomnographic studies, which
show reduced sleep duration, increased sleep disruption, and REM sleep "rebound."
Other substances. Other substances may produce sleep disturbances. Common
examples include medications that affect the central or autonomic nervous systems
(including adrenergic agonists and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists,
cholinergic agonists and antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, antihista-
mines, and corticosteroids). Clinically, such medications are prescribed for the control
of hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
gastrointestinal motility problems, or inflammatory processes.
Differential Diagnosis
Sleep disturbances are commonly encountered in the context of Substance Intoxication
or Substance Withdrawal. A diagnosis of Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder should be
made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxication or Substance Withdrawal
only when the sleep disturbance is judged to be in excess of that usually associated with
the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when the disturbance is sufficiently severe
to warrant independent clinical attention. For example, insomnia is a characteristic
feature of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal. Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Sleep Disorder should be diagnosed instead of Sedative, Hypnotic,
or Anxiolytic Withdrawal only if the insomnia is more severe than that usually
encountered with Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal and requires special
attention and treatment. If the substance-induced sleep disturbance occurs exclusively
during the course of a delirium, the sleep disturbance is considered to be an associated
feature of the delirium and is not diagnosed separately. In substance-induced
presentations that contain a mix of different types of symptoms (e.g., sleep, mood,
and anxiety), the specific type of Substance-Induced Disorder to be diagnosed depends
on which type of symptoms predominates in the clinical presentation.
A Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder is distinguished from a primary Sleep
Disorder and from Insomnia or Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder606
Sleep Disorders
by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the symptoms (see
p. 602).
A Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental
disorder or general medical condition must have its onset while the person is receiving
the medication (or during withdrawal, if there is a withdrawal syndrome associated with
the medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the sleep disturbance will usually
remit within days to several weeks (depending on the half-life of the substance and the
presence of a withdrawal syndrome). If symptoms persist beyond 4 weeks, other causes
for the sleep disturbance should be considered. Not infrequently, individuals with a
primary Sleep Disorder use medications or drugs of abuse to relieve their symptoms. If
the clinician judges that the substance is playing a significant role in the exacerbation
of the sleep disturbance, an additional diagnosis of a Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
may be warranted.
A Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder and Sleep Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition can also be difficult to distinguish. Both may produce similar
symptoms of insomnia, hypersomnia, or (more rarely) a Parasomnia. Furthermore, many
individuals with general medical conditions that cause a sleep complaint are treated with
medications that may also cause disturbances in sleep. The chronology of symptoms is
the most important factor in distinguishing between these two causes of sleep distur-
bance. For instance, a sleep disturbance that clearly preceded the use of any medication
for treatment of a general medical condition would suggest a diagnosis of Sleep Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition. Conversely, sleep symptoms that appear only after
the institution of a particular medication or substance would suggest a Substance-
Induced Sleep Disorder. In a similar way, a sleep disturbance that appears during
treatment for a general medical condition but that improves after the medication is
discontinued suggests a diagnosis of Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder. If the clinician
has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a general medical condition and
substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
and Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder) are given. When there is insufficient evidence
to determine whether the sleep disturbance is due to a substance (including a
medication) or to a general medical condition or is primary (i.e., not due to either a
substance or a general medical condition), Parasomnia Not Otherwise Specified or
Dyssomnia Not Otherwise Specified would be indicated.
Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Sleep
Disorder
A. A prominent disturbance in sleep that is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of either (1) or (2):
(1) the symptoms in Criterion A developed during, or within a month
of, Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal
(2) medication use is etiologically related to the sleep disturbance
(continued)Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
607
D Diagnostic criteria for Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
(continued)
C. The disturbance is not better accounted for by a Sleep Disorder that is
not substance induced. Evidence that the symptoms are better accounted
for by a Sleep Disorder that is not substance induced might include the
following: the symptoms precede the onset of the substance use (or
medication use); the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time
(e.g., about a month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe
intoxication, or are substantially in excess of what would be expected
given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use;
or there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent
non-substance-induced Sleep Disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent
non-substance-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of Substance Intoxi-
cation or Substance Withdrawal only when the sleep symptoms are in excess of
those usually associated with the intoxication or withdrawal syndrome and when
the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Code [Specific Substancej-Induced Sleep Disorder:
(291.8 Alcohol; 292.89 Amphetamine; 292.89 Caffeine; 292.89 Cocaine;
292.89 Opioid; 292.89 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic; 292.89 Other [or
Unknown] Substance)
Specify type:
Insomnia Type: if the predominant sleep disturbance is insomnia
HypersomniaType: if the predominant sleep disturbance is hypersomnia
Parasomnia Type: if the predominant sleep disturbance is a Parasomnia
Mixed Type: if more than one sleep disturbance is present and none
predominates
Specifyif (see table on p. 177 for applicability by substance):
With Onset During Intoxication: if the criteria are met for Intoxication
with the substance and the symptoms develop during the intoxication
syndrome
With Onset During Withdrawal: if criteria are met for Withdrawal from
the substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, a
withdrawal syndromeThis page intentionally left blankImpulse-Control Disorders
Not Elsewhere Classified
T
his section includes disorders of impulse control that are not classified as part of
the presentation of disorders in other sections of the manual (e.g., Substance-
Related Disorders, Paraphilias, Antisocial Personality Disorder, Conduct Disorder,
Schizophrenia, Mood Disorders may have features that involve problems of impulse
control). The essential feature of Impulse-Control Disorders is the failure to resist an
impulse, drive, or temptation to perform an act that is harmful to the person or to others.
For most of the disorders in this section, the individual feels an increasing sense of
tension or arousal before committing the act and then experiences pleasure, gratification,
or relief at the time of committing the act. Following the act there may or may not be
regret, self-reproach, or guilt. The following disorders are included in this section:
Intermittent Explosive Disorder is characterized by discrete episodes of failure
to resist aggressive impulses resulting in serious assaults or destruction of property.
Kleptomania is characterized by the recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal
objects not needed for personal use or monetary value.
Pyromania is characterized by a pattern of fire setting for pleasure, gratification,
or relief of tension.
Pathological Gambling is characterized by recurrent and persistent maladaptive
gambling behavior.
Trichotillomania is characterized by recurrent pulling out of one's hair for
pleasure, gratification, or relief of tension that results in noticeable hair loss.
Impulse-Control Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is included for coding
disorders of impulse control that do not meet the criteria for any of the specific
Impulse-Control Disorders described above or in other sections of the manual.
312.34 Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Intermittent Explosive Disorder is the occurrence of discrete
episodes of failure to resist aggressive impulses that result in serious assaultive acts or
609610
Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified
destruction of property (Criterion A). The degree of aggressiveness expressed during an
episode is grossly out of proportion to any provocation or precipitating psychosocial
stressor (Criterion B). A diagnosis of Intermittent Explosive Disorder is made only after
other mental disorders that might account for episodes of aggressive behavior have been
ruled out (e.g., Antisocial Personality Disorder, Borderline Personality Disorder, a
Psychotic Disorder, a Manic Episode, Conduct Disorder, or Attention Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder) (Criterion C). The aggressive episodes are not due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general
medical condition (e.g., head trauma, Alzheimer's disease) (Criterion C). The individual
may describe the aggressive episodes as "spells" or "attacks" in which the explosive
behavior is preceded by a sense of tension or arousal and is followed immediately by
a sense of relief. Later the individual may feel upset, remorseful, regretful, or embarrassed
about the aggressive behavior.
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Signs of generalized im-
pulsivity or aggressiveness may be present between explosive episodes. Individuals with
narcissistic, obsessive, paranoid, or schizoid traits may be especially prone to having
explosive outbursts of anger when under stress. The disorder may result in job loss,
school suspension, divorce, difficulties with interpersonal relationships, accidents (e.g.,
in vehicles), hospitalization (e.g., because of injuries incurred in fights or accidents), or
incarcerations.
Associated laboratory findings. There may be nonspecific EEG findings (e.g.,
slowing) or evidence of abnormalities on neuropsychological testing (e.g., difficulty with
letter reversal). Signs of altered serotonin metabolism have been found in the cerebro-
spinal fluid of some impulsive and temper-prone individuals, but the specific relationship
of these findings to Intermittent Explosive Disorder is unclear.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
There may be nonspecific or "soft" findings on neurological examinations (e.g., reflex
asymmetries or mirror movements). Developmental difficulties indicative of cerebral
dysfunction may be present (e.g., delayed speech or poor coordination). A history of
neurological conditions (e.g., head injury, episodes of unconsciousness, or febrile
seizures in childhood) may be present. However, if the clinician judges that the
aggressive behavior is a consequence of the direct physiological effects of a diagnosable
general medical condition, the appropriate Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition should be diagnosed instead (e.g., Personality Change Due to Head Trauma,
Aggressive Type; Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, Early Onset, Uncomplicated, With
Behavioral Disturbance).
Specific Culture and Gender Features
Amok is characterized by an episode of acute, unrestrained violent behavior for which
the person claims amnesia. Although traditionally seen in southeastern Asian countries,
cases of amok have been reported in Canada and the United States. Unlike Intermittent
Explosive Disorder, amok typically occurs as a single episode rather than as a pattern312.34 Intermittent Explosive Disorder
611
of aggressive behavior and is often associated with prominent dissociative features.
Episodic violent behavior is more common in males than in females.
Prevalence
Reliable information is lacking, but Intermittent Explosive Disorder is apparently rare.
Course
Limited data are available on the age at onset of Intermittent Explosive Disorder, but it
appears to be from late adolescence to the third decade of life. Mode of onset may be
abrupt and without a prodromal period.
Differential
Diagnosis
Aggressive behavior can occur in the context of many other mental disorders. A diagnosis
of Intermittent Explosive Disorder should be considered only after all other disorders
that are associated with aggressive impulses or behavior have been ruled out. If the
aggressive behavior occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium, a diagnosis of
Intermittent Explosive Disorder is not given. Similarly, when the behavior develops as
part of a dementia, a diagnosis of Intermittent Explosive Disorder is not made and the
appropriate diagnosis is dementia with the specifier With Behavioral Disturbance.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder should be distinguished from Personality Change Due
to a General Medical Condition, Aggressive Type, which is diagnosed when the
pattern of aggressive episodes is judged to be due to the direct physiological effects of
a diagnosable general medical condition (e.g., an individual who has suffered brain
injury from an automobile accident and subsequently manifests a change in personality
characterized by aggressive outbursts). A careful history and a thorough neurological
evaluation are helpful in making the determination. Note that nonspecific abnormalities
on neurological examination (e.g., "soft signs") and nonspecific EEC changes are
compatible with a diagnosis of Intermittent Explosive Disorder and only preempt the
diagnosis if they are indicative of a diagnosable general medical condition.
Aggressive outbursts may also occur in association with Substance Intoxication
or Substance Withdrawal, particularly associated with alcohol, phencyclidine, cocaine
and other stimulants, barbiturates, and inhalants. The clinician should inquire carefully
about the nature and extent of substance use, and a blood or urine drug screen may be
informative.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder should be distinguished from the aggressive or
erratic behavior that can occur in Oppositional Defiant Disorder, Conduct Disorder,
Antisocial Personality Disorder, Borderline Personality Disorder, a Manic Epi-
sode, and Schizophrenia. If the aggressive behavior is better accounted for as a
diagnostic or associated feature of another mental disorder, a separate diagnosis of
Intermittent Explosive Disorder is not given. Aggressive behavior may, of course, occur
when no mental disorder is present. Purposeful behavior is distinguished from
Intermittent Explosive Disorder by the presence of motivation and gain in the aggressive
act. In forensic settings, individuals may malinger Intermittent Explosive Disorder to
avoid responsibility for their behavior.612
Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified
Diagnostic criteria for 312.34 Intermittent Explosive
Disorder
A. Several discrete episodes of failure to resist aggressive impulses that
result in serious assaultive acts or destruction of property.
B. The degree of aggressiveness expressed during the episodes is grossly
out of proportion to any precipitating psychosocial stressors.
C. The aggressive episodes are not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (e.g., Antisocial Personality Disorder, Borderline Personality
Disorder, a Psychotic Disorder, a Manic Episode, Conduct Disorder, or
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder) and are not due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication)
or a general medical condition (e.g., head trauma, Alzheimer's disease).
312.32 Kleptomania
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Kleptomania is the recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal
items even though the items are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value
(Criterion A). The individual experiences a rising subjective sense of tension before the
theft (Criterion B) and feels pleasure, gratification, or relief when committing the theft
(Criterion C). The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance, is not done
in response to a delusion or hallucination (Criterion D), and is not better accounted for
by Conduct Disorder, a Manic Episode, or Antisocial Personality Disorder (Criterion E).
The objects are stolen despite the fact that they are typically of little value to the
individual, who could have afforded to pay for them and often gives them away or
discards them. Occasionally the individual may hoard the stolen objects or surreptitiously
return them. Although individuals with this disorder will generally avoid stealing when
immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in full view of a police officer), they usually do not
preplan the thefts or fully take into account the chances of apprehension. The stealing
is done without assistance from, or collaboration with, others.
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Kleptomania experience the impulse to steal as ego-dystonic and are
aware that the act is wrong and senseless. The person frequently fears being appre-
hended and often feels depressed or guilty about the thefts. Mood Disorders (especially
Major Depressive Disorder), Anxiety Disorders, Eating Disorders (particularly Bulimia
Nervosa), and Personality Disorders may be associated with Kleptomania. The disorder
may cause legal, family, career, and personal difficulties.312.32 Kleptomania
613
Prevalence
Kleptomania is a rare condition that appears to occur in fewer than 5% of identified
shoplifters. It appears to be much more common in females.
Course
There is little systematic information on the course of Kleptomania, but three typical
courses have been described: sporadic with brief episodes and long periods of remission;
episodic with protracted periods of stealing and periods of remission; and chronic with
some degree of fluctuation. The disorder may continue for years, despite multiple
convictions for shoplifting.
Differential
Diagnosis
Kleptomania should be distinguished from ordinary acts of theft or shoplifting.
Ordinary theft (whether planned or impulsive) is deliberate and is motivated by the
usefulness of the object or its monetary worth. Some individuals, especially adolescents,
may also steal on a dare, as an act of rebellion, or as a right of passage. The diagnosis
is not made unless other characteristic features of Kleptomania are also present.
Kleptomania is exceedingly rare, whereas shoplifting is relatively common. In Malin-
gering, individuals may simulate the symptoms of Kleptomania to avoid criminal
prosecution. Antisocial Personality Disorder and Conduct Disorder are distin-
guished from Kleptomania by a general pattern of antisocial behavior. Kleptomania
should be distinguished from intentional or inadvertent stealing that may occur during
a Manic Episode, in response to delusions or hallucinations (e.g., in Schizophrenia),
or as a result of a dementia.
Diagnostic criteria for 312.32 Kleptomania
A. Recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not needed
for personal use or for their monetary value.
B. Increasing sense of tension immediately before committing the theft.
C. Pleasure, gratification, or relief at the time of committing the theft.
D. The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance and is not
in response to a delusion or a hallucination.
E. The stealing is not better accounted for by Conduct Disorder, a Manic
Episode, or Antisocial Personality Disorder.614
Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified
312.33 Pyromania
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Pyromania is the presence of multiple episodes of deliberate
and purposeful fire setting (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder experience tension
or affective arousal before setting a fire (Criterion B). There is a fascination with, interest
in, curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational contexts (e.g., paraphernalia,
uses, consequences) (Criterion C). Individuals with this disorder are often regular
"watchers" at fires in their neighborhoods, may set off false alarms, and derive pleasure
from institutions, equipment, and personnel associated with fire. They may spend time
at the local fire department, set fires to be affiliated with the fire department, or even
become firefighters. Individuals with this disorder experience pleasure, gratification, or
a release of tension when setting the fire, witnessing its effects, or participating in its
aftermath (Criterion D). The fire setting is not done for monetary gain, as an expression
of sociopolitical ideology, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or vengeance,
to improve one's living circumstances, or in response to a delusion or a hallucination
(Criterion E). The fire setting does not result from impaired judgment (e.g., in dementia,
Mental Retardation, or Substance Intoxication). The diagnosis is not made if the fire
setting is better accounted for by Conduct Disorder, a Manic Episode, or Antisocial
Personality Disorder (Criterion F).
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Pyromania may make considerable advance preparation for starting a
fire. They may be indifferent to the consequences to life or property caused by the fire,
or they may derive satisfaction from the resulting property destruction. The behaviors
may lead to property damage, legal consequences, or injury or loss of life to the fire
setter or to others.
Specific Age and Gender Features
Although fire setting is a major problem in children and adolescents (over 40% of those
arrested for arson offenses in the United States are under age 18 years), Pyromania in
childhood appears to be rare. Juvenile fire setting is usually associated with Conduct
Disorder, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, or Adjustment Disorder. Pyromania
occurs much more often in males, especially those with poorer social skills and learning
difficulties.
Prevalence
Pyromania is apparently rare.
Course
There are insufficient data to establish a typical age at onset of Pyromania. The
relationship between fire setting in childhood and Pyromania in adulthood has not been
documented. In individuals with Pyromania, fire-setting incidents are episodic and may
wax and wane in frequency. Longitudinal course is unknown.312.31 Pathological Gambling
615
Differential Diagnosis
It is important to rule out other causes of fire setting before giving the diagnosis of
Pyromania. Intentional fire setting may occur for profit, sabotage, or revenge; to
conceal a crime; to make a political statement (e.g., an act of terrorism or protest);
or to attract attention or recognition (e.g., setting a fire in order to discover it and
save the day). Fire setting may also occur as part of developmental experimentation
in childhood (e.g., playing with matches, lighters, or fire). Some individuals with mental
disorders use fire setting to communicate a desire, wish, or need, often directed at gaining
a change in the nature or location of services. This form of fire setting has been referred
to as "communicative arson" and must be carefully distinguished from Pyromania. A
separate diagnosis of Pyromania is not given when fire setting occurs as part of Conduct
Disorder, a Manic Episode, or Antisocial Personality Disorder, or if it occurs in
response to a delusion or a hallucination (e.g., in Schizophrenia). The diagnosis of
Pyromania should also not be given when fire setting results from impaired judgment
associated with dementia, Mental Retardation, or Substance Intoxication.
Diagnostic criteria for 312.33 Pyromania
A. Deliberate and purposeful fire setting on more than one occasion.
B. Tension or affective arousal before the act.
C. Fascination with, interest in, curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its
situational contexts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses, consequences).
D. Pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting fires, or when witnessing
or participating in their aftermath.
E. The fire setting is not done for monetary gain, as an expression of
sociopolitical ideology, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or
vengeance, to improve one's living circumstances, in response to a
delusion or hallucination, or as a result of impaired judgment (e.g., in
dementia, Mental Retardation, Substance Intoxication).
F. The fire setting is not better accounted for by Conduct Disorder, a Manic
Episode, or Antisocial Personality Disorder.
312.31 Pathological Gambling
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Pathological Gambling is persistent and recurrent maladaptive
gambling behavior (Criterion A) that disrupts personal, family, or vocational pursuits.
The diagnosis is not made if the gambling behavior is better accounted for by a Manic
Episode (Criterion B).6l6
Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified
The individual may be preoccupied with gambling (e.g., reliving past gambling
experiences, planning the next gambling venture, or thinking of ways to get money with
which to gamble) (Criterion Al). Most individuals with Pathological Gambling say that
they are seeking "action" (an aroused, euphoric state) even more than money.
Increasingly larger bets, or greater risks, may be needed to continue to produce the
desired level of excitement (Criterion A2). Individuals with Pathological Gambling often
continue to gamble despite repeated efforts to control, cut back, or stop the behavior
(Criterion A3). There may be restlessness or irritability when attempting to cut down or
stop gambling (Criterion A4). The individual may gamble as a way of escaping from
problems or to relieve a dysphoric mood (e.g., feelings of helplessness, guilt, anxiety,
depression) (Criterion A5). A pattern of "chasing" one's losses may develop, with an
urgent need to keep gambling (often with larger bets or the taking of greater risks) to
undo a loss or series of losses. The individual may abandon his or her gambling strategy
and try to win back losses all at once. Although all gamblers may chase for short periods,
it is the long-term chase that is more characteristic of individuals with Pathological
Gambling (Criterion A6). The individual may lie to family members, therapists, or others
to conceal the extent of involvement with gambling (Criterion A7). When the individual's
borrowing resources are strained, the person may resort to antisocial behavior (e.g.,
forgery, fraud, theft, or embezzlement) to obtain money (Criterion A8). The individual
may have jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career
opportunity because of gambling (Criterion A9). The individual may also engage in
"bailout" behavior, turning to family or others for help with a desperate financial situation
that was caused by gambling (Criterion A10).
Associated Features and Disorders
Distortions in thinking (e.g., denial, superstitions, overconfidence, or a sense of power
and control) may be present in individuals with Pathological Gambling. Many individuals
with Pathological Gambling believe that money is both the cause of and solution to all
their problems. Individuals with Pathological Gambling are frequently highly competi-
tive, energetic, restless, and easily bored. They may be overly concerned with the
approval of others and may be generous to the point of extravagance. When not
gambling, they may be workaholics or "binge" workers who wait until they are up against
deadlines before really working hard. They may be prone to developing general medical
conditions that are associated with stress (e.g., hypertension, peptic ulcer disease,
migraine). Increased rates of Mood Disorders, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,
Substance Abuse or Dependence, and Antisocial, Narcissistic, and Borderline Personality
Disorders have been reported in individuals with Pathological Gambling. Of individ-
uals in treatment for Pathological Gambling, 20% are reported to have attempted
suicide.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
There are cultural variations in the prevalence and type of gambling activities (e.g., pai
go, cockfights, horse racing, the stock market). Approximately one-third of individuals
with Pathological Gambling are females. Females with the disorder are more apt to be
depressed and to gamble as an escape. Females are underrepresented in treatment
programs for gambling and represent only 2%-4% of the population of Gamblers312.31 Pathological Gambling
617
Anonymous. This may be a function of the greater stigma attached to female
gamblers.
Prevalence
The limited data available suggest that the prevalence of Pathological Gambling may be
as high as l%-3% of the adult population.
Course
Pathological Gambling typically begins in early adolescence in males and later in life in
females. Although a few individuals are "hooked" with their very first bet, for most the
course is more insidious. There may be years of social gambling followed by an abrupt
onset that may be precipitated by greater exposure to gambling or by a stressor. The
gambling pattern may be regular or episodic, and the course of the disorder is typically
chronic. There is generally a progression in the frequency of gambling, the amount
wagered, and the preoccupation with gambling and obtaining money with which to
gamble. The urge to gamble and gambling activity generally increase during periods of
stress or depression.
Familial Pattern
Pathological Gambling and Alcohol Dependence are both more common among the
parents of individuals with Pathological Gambling than among the general popula-
tion.
Differential
Diagnosis
Pathological Gambling must be distinguished from social gambling and professional
gambling. Social gambling typically occurs with friends or colleagues and lasts for a
limited period of time, with predetermined acceptable losses. In professional gam-
bling, risks are limited and discipline is central. Some individuals can experience
problems associated with their gambling (e.g., short-term chasing behavior and loss of
control) that do not meet the full criteria for Pathological Gambling.
Loss of judgment and excessive gambling may occur during a Manic Episode. An
additional diagnosis of Pathological Gambling should only be given if the gambling
behavior is not better accounted for by the Manic Episode (e.g., a history of maladaptive
gambling behavior at times other than during a Manic Episode). Alternatively, an
individual with Pathological Gambling may exhibit behavior during a gambling binge
that resembles a Manic Episode. However, once the individual is away from the
gambling, these manic-like features dissipate. Problems with gambling may occur in
individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder; if criteria are met for both disorders,
both can be diagnosed.618
Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified
Diagnostic criteria for 312.31 Pathological Gambling
A. Persistent and recurrent maladaptive gambling behavior as indicated by
five (or more) of the following:
(1) is preoccupied with gambling (e.g., preoccupied with reliving past
gambling experiences, handicapping or planning the next ven-
ture, or thinking of ways to get money with which to gamble)
(2) needs to gamble with increasing amounts of money in order to
achieve the desired excitement
(3) has repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop
gambling
(4) is restless or irritable when attempting to cut down or stop
gambling
(5) gambles as a way of escaping from problems or of relieving a
dysphoric mood (e.g., feelings of helplessness, guilt, anxiety,
depression)
(6) after losing money gambling, often returns another day to get even
("chasing" one's losses)
(7) lies to family members, therapist, or others to conceal the extent
of involvement with gambling
(8) has committed illegal acts such as forgery, fraud, theft, or embez-
zlement to finance gambling
(9) has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educa-
tional or career opportunity because of gambling
(10) relies on others to provide money to relieve a desperate financial
situation caused by gambling
B. The gambling behavior is not better accounted for by a Manic Episode.
312.39 Trichotillomania
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Trichotillomania is the recurrent pulling out of one's own hair
that results in noticeable hair loss (Criterion A). Sites of hair pulling may include any
region of the body in which hair may grow (including axillary, pubic, and perirectal
regions), with the most common sites being the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelashes. Hair
pulling may occur in brief episodes scattered throughout the day or in less frequent but
more sustained periods that can continue for hours. Stressful circumstances frequently
increase hair-pulling behavior, but increased hair pulling also occurs in states of
relaxation and distraction (e.g., when reading a book or watching television). An
increasing sense of tension is present immediately before pulling out the hair (Criterion
B). For some, tension does not necessarily precede the act but is associated with attempts
to resist the urge. There is gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when pulling out
the hair (Criterion C). Some individuals experience an "itchlike" sensation in the scalp312.39 Trichotillomania
619
that is eased by the act of pulling hair. The diagnosis is not given if the hair pulling is
better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., in response to a delusion or a
hallucination) or is due to a general medical condition (e.g., inflammation of the skin
or other dermatological conditions) (Criterion D). The disturbance must cause significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(Criterion E).
Associated Features and Disorders
Associated descriptive features and mental disorders. Examining the hair root,
twirling it off, pulling the strand between the teeth, or trichophagia (eating hairs) may
occur with Trichotillomania. Hair pulling does not usually occur in the presence of other
people (except immediate family members), and social situations may be avoided.
Individuals commonly deny their hair-pulling behavior and conceal or camouflage the
resulting alopecia. Some individuals have urges to pull hairs from other people and may
sometimes try to find opportunities to do so surreptitiously. They may pull hairs from
pets, dolls, and other fibrous materials (e.g., sweaters or carpets). Nail biting, scratching,
gnawing, and excoriation may be associated with Trichotillomania. Individuals with
Trichotillomania may also have Mood Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, or Mental Retar-
dation.
Associated laboratory findings. Certain histological findings are considered char-
acteristic and may aid diagnosis when Trichotillomania is suspected and the affected
individual denies symptoms. Biopsy samples from involved areas may reveal short and
broken hairs. Histological examination will reveal normal and damaged follicles in the
same area, as well as an increased number of catagen hairs. Some hair follicles may
show signs of trauma (wrinkling of the outer root sheath). Involved follicles may be
empty or may contain a deeply pigmented keratinous material. The absence of
inflammation distinguishes Trichotillomania-induced alopecia from alopecia areata.
Associated physical examination findings and general medical conditions.
Pain is not routinely reported to accompany the hair pulling; pruritus and tingling in the
involved areas may be present. The patterns of hair loss are highly variable. Areas of
complete alopecia are common, as well as areas of noticeably thinned hair density.
When the scalp is involved, there may be a predilection for the crown or parietal regions.
The surface of the scalp usually shows no evidence of excoriation. There may be a
pattern of nearly complete baldness except for a narrow perimeter around the outer
margins of the scalp, particularly at the nape of the neck ("tonsure trichotillomania").
Eyebrows and eyelashes may be completely absent. Thinning of pubic hairs may be
apparent on inspection. There may be areas of absent hair on the limbs or torso.
Trichophagia may result in bezoars (hair balls) that may lead to anemia, abdominal pain,
hematemesis, nausea and vomiting, and bowel obstruction and even perforation.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Among children with Trichotillomania, males and females are equally represented.
Among adults, Trichotillomania appears to be much more common among females than
among males. This may reflect the true gender ratio of the condition or it may reflect620
Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Classified
differential treatment seeking based on cultural or gender-based attitudes regarding
appearance (e.g., acceptance of normative hair loss among males).
Prevalence
No systematic data are available on the prevalence of Trichotillomania. Although
Trichotillomania was previously thought to be an uncommon condition, it is now
believed to occur more frequently. Recent surveys of college samples suggest that l%-2%
of students have a past or current history of Trichotillomania.
Course
Transient periods of hair pulling in early childhood may be considered a benign "habit"
with a self-limited course. However, many individuals who present with chronic
Trichotillomania in adulthood report onset in early childhood. The age at onset is usually
before young adulthood, with peaks at around ages 5-8 years and age 13 years. Some
individuals have continuous symptoms for decades. For others, the disorder may come
and go for weeks, months, or years at a time. Sites of hair pulling may vary over
time.
Differential Diagnosis
Other causes of alopecia should be considered in individuals who deny hair pulling
(e.g., alopecia areata, male-pattern baldness, chronic discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen
planopilaris, folliculitis decalvans, pseudopelade, and alopecia mucinosa). A separate
diagnosis of Trichotillomania is not given if the behavior is better accounted for by
another mental disorder (e.g., in response to a delusion or a hallucination in
Schizophrenia). The repetitive hair pulling in Trichotillomania must be distinguished
from a compulsion, as in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. In Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder, the repetitive behaviors are performed in response to an obsession, or
according to rules that must be applied rigidly. An additional diagnosis of Stereotypic
Movement Disorder is not made if the repetitive behavior is limited to hair pulling.
The self-induced alopecia in Trichotillomania must be distinguished from Factitious
Disorder With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symptoms, in which the moti-
vation for the behavior is assuming the sick role.
Many individuals twist and play with hair, especially during states of heightened
anxiety, but this behavior does not usually qualify for a diagnosis of Trichotillomania.
Some individuals may present with features of Trichotillomania, but the resulting hair
damage may be so slight as to be virtually undetectable. In such situations, the diagnosis
should only be considered if the individual experiences significant distress. In children,
self-limited periods of hair pulling are common and may be considered a temporary
"habit." Therefore, among children, the diagnosis should be reserved for situations in
which the behavior has persisted for several months.312.30 Impulse-Control Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
621
Diagnostic criteria for 312.39 Trichotillomania
A. Recurrent pulling out of one's hair resulting in noticeable hair loss.
B. An increasing sense of tension immediately before pulling out the hair
or when attempting to resist the behavior.
C. Pleasure, gratification, or relief when pulling out the hair.
D. The disturbance is not better accounted for by another mental disorder
and is not due to a general medical condition (e.g., a dermatological
condition).
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
312.30 Impulse-Control Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders of impulse control that do not meet the criteria for any
specific Impulse-Control Disorder or for another mental disorder having features
involving impulse control described elsewhere in the manual (e.g., Substance Depen-
dence, a Paraphilia).This page intentionally left blankAdjustment Disorders
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of an Adjustment Disorder is the development of clinically
significant emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable psychosocial
stressor or stressors. The symptoms must develop within 3 months after the onset of the
stressor(s) (Criterion A). The clinical significance of the reaction is indicated either by
marked distress that is in excess of what would be expected given the nature of the
stressor, or by significant impairment in social or occupational (academic) functioning
(Criterion B). This category should not be used if the disturbance meets the criteria for
another specific Axis I disorder (e.g., a specific Anxiety or Mood Disorder) or is merely
an exacerbation of a preexisting Axis I or II disorder (Criterion C). However, an
Adjustment Disorder may be diagnosed in the presence of another Axis I or Axis II
disorder if the latter does not account for the pattern of symptoms that have occurred
in response to the stressor. The diagnosis of an Adjustment Disorder also does not apply
when the symptoms represent Bereavement (Criterion D). By definition, an Adjustment
Disorder must resolve within 6 months of the termination of the stressor (or its
consequences) (Criterion E). However, the symptoms may persist for a prolonged period
(i.e., longer than 6 months) if they occur in response to a chronic stressor (e.g., a chronic,
disabling general medical condition) or to a stressor that has enduring consequences
(e.g., the financial and emotional difficulties resulting from a divorce).
The stressor may be a single event (e.g., termination of a romantic relationship), or
there may be multiple stressors (e.g., marked business difficulties and marital problems).
Stressors may be recurrent (e.g., associated with seasonal business crises) or continuous
(e.g., living in a crime-ridden neighborhood). Stressors may affect a single individual,
an entire family, or a larger group or community (e.g., as in a natural disaster). Some
stressors may accompany specific developmental events (e.g., going to school, leaving
the parental home, getting married, becoming a parent, failing to attain occupational
goals, retirement).
Subtypes and Specifiers
Adjustment Disorders are coded according to the subtype that best characterizes the
predominant symptoms:
309-0 With Depressed Mood. This subtype should be used when the pre-
dominant manifestations are symptoms such as depressed mood, tearfulness, or
feelings of hopelessness.
623624
Adjustment Disorders
309-24 With Anxiety. This subtype should be used when the predominant
manifestations are symptoms such as nervousness, worry, or jitteriness or, in
children, fears of separation from major attachment figures.
309.28 With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood. This subtype should be
used when the predominant manifestation is a combination of depression and
anxiety.
309-3 With Disturbance of Conduct. This subtype should be used when the
predominant manifestation is a disturbance in conduct in which there is violation
of the rights of others or of major age-appropriate societal norms and rules (e.g.,
truancy, vandalism, reckless driving, fighting, defaulting on legal responsibilities).
309.4 With Mixed Disturbance of Emotions and Conduct. This subtype
should be used when the predominant manifestations are both emotional
symptoms (e.g., depression, anxiety) and a disturbance of conduct (see above
subtype).
309.9 Unspecified. This subtype should be used for maladaptive reactions
(e.g., physical complaints, social withdrawal, or work or academic inhibition) to
psychosocial stressors that are not classifiable as one of the specific subtypes of
Adjustment Disorder.
The duration of the symptoms of an Adjustment Disorder can be indicated by
choosing one of the following specifiers:
Acute. This specifier can be used to indicate persistence of symptoms for less
than 6 months.
Chronic. This specifier can be used to indicate persistence of symptoms for 6
months or longer. By definition, symptoms cannot persist for more than 6 months
after the termination of the stressor or its consequences. The Chronic specifier
therefore applies when the duration of the disturbance is longer than 6 months
in response to a chronic stressor or to a stressor that has enduring consequences.
Reporting Procedures
The predominant symptom presentation for an Adjustment Disorder should be indicated
by choosing the diagnostic code and term from the list above, followed, if desired, by
the Acute or Chronic specifier (e.g., 309-0 Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood,
Acute). In a multiaxial assessment, the nature of the stressor can be indicated by listing
it on Axis IV (e.g., Divorce).
Associated Features and Disorders
The subjective distress or impairment in functioning associated with Adjustment Disor-
ders is frequently manifested as decreased performance at work or school and temporary
changes in social relationships. Adjustment Disorders are associated with an increased
risk of suicide attempts and suicide. The presence of an Adjustment Disorder may
complicate the course of illness in individuals who have a general medical condition
(e.g., decreased compliance with the recommended medical regimen or increased length
of hospital stay).Adjustment Disorders
625
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
The context of the individual's cultural setting should be taken into account in making
the clinical judgment of whether the individual's response to the stressor is maladaptive
or whether the associated distress is in excess of what would be expected. The nature,
meaning, and experience of the stressors and the evaluation of the response to the
stressors may vary across cultures. Adjustment Disorders may occur in any age group,
and males and females are equally affected.
Prevalence
Adjustment Disorders are apparently common, although epidemiological figures vary
widely as a function of the population studied and the assessment methods used. The
percentage of individuals in outpatient mental health treatment with a principal diagnosis
of Adjustment Disorder ranges from approximately 5% to 20%. Individuals from
disadvantaged life circumstances experience a high rate of stressors and may be at
increased risk for the disorder.
Course
By definition, the disturbance in Adjustment Disorder begins within 3 months of onset
of a stressor and lasts no longer than 6 months after the stressor or its consequences
have ceased. If the stressor is an acute event (e.g., being fired from a job), the onset of
the disturbance is usually immediate (or-within a few days) and the duration is relatively
brief (e.g., no more than a few months). If the stressor or its consequences persist, the
Adjustment Disorder may also persist.
Differential
Diagnosis
Adjustment Disorder is a residual category used to describe presentations that are a
response to an identifiable stressor and that do not meet the criteria for another specific
Axis I disorder. For example, if an individual has symptoms that meet criteria for a Major
Depressive Episode in response to a stressor, the diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder is
not applicable. Adjustment Disorder can be diagnosed in addition to another Axis I
disorder only if the latter does not account for the particular symptoms that occur in
reaction to the stressor. For example, an individual may develop Adjustment Disorder
With Depressed Mood after losing a job and at the same time have a diagnosis of
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.
Because Personality Disorders are frequently exacerbated by stress, the additional
diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder is usually not made. However, if symptoms that are
not characteristic of the Personality Disorder appear in response to a stressor (e.g., a
person with Paranoid Personality Disorder develops depressed mood in response to job
loss), the additional diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder may be appropriate.
The diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder requires the presence of an identifiable
stressor, in contrast to the atypical or subthreshold presentations that would be diagnosed
as a Not Otherwise Specified disorder (e.g., Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified). If the symptoms of Adjustment Disorder persist for more than 6 months after
the stressor or its consequences have ceased, the diagnosis should be changed to another626
Adjustment Disorders
mental disorder, usually in the appropriate Not Otherwise Specified category.
Adjustment Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Acute Stress Disorder
all require the presence of a psychosocial stressor. Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and
Acute Stress Disorder are characterized by the presence of an extreme stressor and a
specific constellation of symptoms. In contrast, Adjustment Disorder can be triggered by
a stressor of any severity and may involve a wide range of possible symptoms.
In Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition, specific psychological
symptoms, behaviors, or other factors exacerbate a general medical condition, compli-
cate treatment for a general medical condition, or otherwise increase the risks of
developing a general medical condition. In Adjustment Disorder, the relationship is the
reverse (i.e., the psychological symptoms develop in response to the stress of having or
being diagnosed with a general medical condition). Both conditions may be present in
some individuals.
Bereavement is generally diagnosed instead of Adjustment Disorder when the
reaction is an expectable response to the death of a loved one. The diagnosis of
Adjustment Disorder may be appropriate when the reaction is in excess of, or more
prolonged than, what would be expected. Adjustment Disorder should also be distin-
guished from other nonpathological reactions to stress that do not lead to marked
distress in excess of what is expected and that do not cause significant impairment in
social or occupational functioning.
I Diagnostic criteria for Adjustment Disorders
A. The development of emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to
an identifiable stressor(s) occurring within 3 months of the onset of the
stressor(s).
B. These symptoms or behaviors are clinically significant as evidenced by
either of the following:
(1) marked distress that is in excess of what would be expected from
exposure to the stressor
(2) significant impairment in social or occupational (academic) func-
tioning
C. The stress-related disturbance does not meet the criteria for another
specific Axis I disorder and is not merely an exacerbation of a preexisting
Axis I or Axis II disorder.
D. The symptoms do not represent Bereavement.
E. Once the stressor (or its consequences) has terminated, the symptoms
do not persist for more than an additional 6 months.
Specify if:
Acute: if the disturbance lasts less than 6 months
Chronic: if the disturbance lasts for 6 months or longer
(continued)Adjustment Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for Adjustment Disorders (continued]
Adjustment Disorders are coded based on the subtype, which is selected
according to the predominant symptoms. The specific stressor(s) can be
specified on Axis IV.
309-0 With Depressed Mood
309.24 With Anxiety
309.28 With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood
309.3 With Disturbance of Conduct
309.4 With Mixed Disturbance of Emotions and Conduct
309-9 Unspecified
627This page intentionally left blankPersonality Disorders
T
his section begins with a general definition of Personality Disorder that applies to
each of the 10 specific Personality Disorders. A Personality Disorder is an enduring
pattern of inner experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations
of the individual's culture, is pervasive and inflexible, has an onset in adolescence or
early adulthood, is stable over time, and leads to distress or impairment. The Personality
Disorders included in this section are listed below.
Paranoid Personality Disorder is a pattern of distrust and suspiciousness such
that others' motives are interpreted as malevolent.
Schizoid Personality Disorder is a pattern of detachment from social relationships
and a restricted range of emotional expression.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder is a pattern of acute discomfort in close
relationships, cognitive or perceptual distortions, and eccentricities of behavior.
Antisocial Personality Disorder is a pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the
rights of others.
Borderline Personality Disorder is a pattern of instability in interpersonal
relationships, self-image, and affects, and marked impulsivity.
Histrionic Personality Disorder is a pattern of excessive emotionality and
attention seeking.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder is a pattern of grandiosity, need for admiration,
and lack of empathy.
Avoidant Personality Disorder is a pattern of social inhibition, feelings of
inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation.
Dependent Personality Disorder is a pattern of submissive and clinging behavior
related to an excessive need to be taken care of.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder is a pattern of preoccupation with
orderliness, perfectionism, and control.
Personality Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is a category provided for two
situations: 1) the individual's personality pattern meets the general criteria for a
Personality Disorder and traits of several different Personality Disorders are present, but
the criteria for any specific Personality Disorder are not met; or 2) the individual's
personality pattern meets the general criteria for a Personality Disorder, but the individual
is considered to have a Personality Disorder that is not included in the Classification
(e.g., passive-aggressive personality disorder).
The Personality Disorders are grouped into three clusters based on descriptive
similarities. Cluster A includes the Paranoid, Schizoid, and Schizotypal Personality
Disorders. Individuals with these disorders often appear odd or eccentric. Cluster B
629630
Personality Disorders
includes the Antisocial, Borderline, Histrionic, and Narcissistic Personality Disorders.
Individuals with these disorders often appear dramatic, emotional, or erratic. Cluster C
includes the Avoidant, Dependent, and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorders.
Individuals with these disorders often appear anxious or fearful. It should be noted that
this clustering system, although useful in some research and educational situations, has
serious limitations and has not been consistently validated. Moreover, individuals
frequently present with co-occurring Personality Disorders from different clusters.
Diagnostic Features
Personality traits are enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the
environment and oneself that are exhibited in a wide range of social and personal
contexts. Only when personality traits are inflexible and maladaptive and cause
significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute Personality
Disorders. The essential feature of a Personality Disorder is an enduring pattern of inner
experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations of the individual's
culture and is manifested in at least two of the following areas: cognition, affectivity,
interpersonal functioning, or impulse control (Criterion A). This enduring pattern is
inflexible and pervasive across a broad range of personal and social situations (Criterio
B) and leads to clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The pattern is stable and of long
duration, and its onset can be traced back at least to adolescence or early adulthood
(Criterion D). The pattern is not better accounted for as a manifestation or consequence
of another mental disorder (Criterion E) and is not due to the direct physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin) or a general
medical condition (e.g., head trauma) (Criterion F). Specific diagnostic criteria are also
provided for each of the Personality Disorders included in this section. The items in the
criteria sets for each of the specific Personality Disorders are listed in order of decreasing
diagnostic importance as measured by relevant data on diagnostic efficiency (when
available).
The diagnosis of Personality Disorders requires an evaluation of the individual's
long-term patterns of functioning, and the particular personality features must be evident
by early adulthood. The personality traits that define these disorders must also be
distinguished from characteristics that emerge in response to specific situational stressors
or more transient mental states (e.g., Mood or Anxiety Disorders, Substance Intoxication).
The clinician should assess the stability of personality traits over time and across different
situations. Although a single interview with the person is sometimes sufficient for making
the diagnosis, it is often necessary to conduct more than one interview and to space
these over time. Assessment can also be complicated by the fact that the characteristics
that define a Personality Disorder may not be considered problematic by the individual
(i.e., the traits are often ego-syntonic). To help overcome this difficulty, supplementary
information from other informants may be helpful.
Recording Procedures
Personality Disorders are coded on Axis II. When (as is often the case) an individual's
pattern of behavior meets criteria for more than one Personality Disorder, the clinician
should list all relevant Personality Disorder diagnoses in order of importance. When anPersonality Disorders
631
Axis I disorder is not the principal diagnosis or the reason for visit, the clinician is
encouraged to indicate which Personality Disorder is the principal diagnosis or the
reason for visit by noting "Principal Diagnosis" or "Reason for Visit" in parentheses. In
most cases, the principal diagnosis or the reason for visit is also the main focus of
attention or treatment. Personality Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is the appropriate
diagnosis for a "mixed" presentation in which criteria are not met for any single
Personality Disorder but features of several Personality Disorders are present and involve
clinically significant impairment.
Specific maladaptive personality traits that do not meet the threshold for a Personality
Disorder may also be listed on Axis II. In such instances, no specific code should be
used; for example, the clinician might record "Axis II: V71.09 No diagnosis on Axis II,
histrionic personality traits." The use of particular defense mechanisms may also be
indicated on Axis II. For example, a clinician might record "Axis II: 301.6 Dependent
Personality Disorder; Frequent use of denial." Glossary definitions for specific defense
mechanisms and the Defensive Functioning Scale appear in Appendix B (p. 751).
When an individual has a chronic Axis I Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia)
that was preceded by a preexisting Personality Disorder (e.g., Schizotypal, Schizoid,
Paranoid), the Personality Disorder should be recorded on Axis II, followed by
"Premorbid" in parentheses. For example: Axis I: 295-30 Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type;
Axis II: 301.20 Schizoid Personality Disorder (Premorbid).
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Judgments about personality functioning must take into account the individual's ethnic,
cultural, and social background. Personality Disorders should not be confused with
problems associated with acculturation following immigration or with the expression of
habits, customs, or religious and political values professed by the individual's culture of
origin. Especially when evaluating someone from a different background, it is useful for
the clinician to obtain additional information from informants who are familiar with the
person's cultural background.
Personality Disorder categories may be applied to children or adolescents in those
relatively unusual instances in which the individual's particular maladaptive personality
traits appear to be pervasive, persistent, and unlikely to be limited to a particular
developmental stage or an episode of an Axis I disorder. It should be recognized that
the traits of a Personality Disorder that appear in childhood will often not persist
unchanged into adult life. To diagnose a Personality Disorder in an individual under
age 18 years, the features must have been present for at least 1 year. The one exception
to this is Antisocial Personality Disorder, which cannot be diagnosed in individuals under
age 18 years (see p. 645). Although, by definition, a Personality Disorder requires an
onset no later than early adulthood, individuals may not come to clinical attention until
relatively late in life. A Personality Disorder may be exacerbated following the loss of
significant supporting persons (e.g., a spouse) or previously stabilizing social situations
(e.g., a job). However, the development of a change in personality in middle adulthood
or later life warrants a thorough evaluation to determine the possible presence of a
Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition or an unrecognized Substance-
Related Disorder.
Certain Personality Disorders (e.g., Antisocial Personality Disorder) are diagnosed
more frequently in men. Others (e.g., Borderline, Histrionic, and Dependent Personality632
Personality Disorders
Disorders) are diagnosed more frequently in women. Although these differences in
prevalence probably reflect real gender differences in the presence of such patterns,
clinicians must be cautious not to overdiagnose or underdiagnose certain Personality
Disorders in females or in males because of social stereotypes about typical gender roles
and behaviors.
Course
The features of a Personality Disorder usually become recognizable during adolescence
or early adult life. By definition, a Personality Disorder is an enduring pattern of thinking,
feeling, and behaving that is relatively stable over time. Some types of Personality
Disorder (notably, Antisocial and Borderline Personality Disorders) tend to become less
evident or to remit with age, whereas this appears to be less true for some other types
(e.g., Obsessive-Compulsive and Schizotypal Personality Disorders).
Differential
Diagnosis
Many of the specific criteria for the Personality Disorders describe features (e.g.,
suspiciousness, dependency, or insensitivity) that are also characteristic of episodes of
Axis I mental disorders. A Personality Disorder should be diagnosed only when the
defining characteristics appeared before early adulthood, are typical of the individual's
long-term functioning, and do not occur exclusively during an episode of an Axis I
disorder. It may be particularly difficult (and not particularly useful) to distinguish
Personality Disorders from those Axis I disorders (e.g., Dysthymic Disorder) that have
an early onset and a chronic, relatively stable course. Some Personality Disorders may
have a "spectrum" relationship to particular Axis I conditions (e.g., Schizotypal Person-
ality Disorder with Schizophrenia; Avoidant Personality Disorder with Social Phobia)
based on phenomenological or biological similarities or familial aggregation.
For the three Personality Disorders that may be related to the Psychotic Disorders
(i.e., Paranoid, Schizoid, and Schizotypal), there is an exclusion criterion stating that the
pattern of behavior must not have occurred exclusively during the course of Schizophre-
nia, a Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features, or another Psychotic Disorder. When an
individual has a chronic Axis I Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia) that was preceded
by a preexisting Personality Disorder, the Personality Disorder should also be recorded,
on Axis II, followed by "Premorbid" in parentheses.
The clinician must be cautious in diagnosing Personality Disorders during an episode
of a Mood Disorder or an Anxiety Disorder because these conditions may have
cross-sectional symptom features that mimic personality traits and may make it more
difficult to evaluate retrospectively the individual's long-term patterns of functioning.
When personality changes emerge and persist after an individual has been exposed to
extreme stress, a diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder should be considered
(see p. 424). When a person has a Substance-Related Disorder, it is important not to
make a Personality Disorder diagnosis based solely on behaviors that are consequences
of Substance Intoxication or Withdrawal or that are associated with activities in the
service of sustaining a dependency (e.g., antisocial behavior). When enduring changes
in personality arise as a result of the direct physiological effects of a general medical
condition (e.g., brain tumor), a diagnosis of Personality Change Due to a General
Medical Condition (p. 171) should be considered.Personality Disorders
633
Personality Disorders must be distinguished from personality traits that do not
reach the threshold for a Personality Disorder. Personality traits are diagnosed as
a Personality Disorder only when they are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and
cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress.
General diagnostic criteria for a Personality Disorder
A. An enduring pattern of inner experience and behavior that deviates
markedly from the expectations of the individual's culture. This pattern
is manifested in two (or more) of the following areas:
(1) cognition (i.e., ways of perceiving and interpreting self, other
people, and events)
(2) affectivity (i.e., the range, intensity, lability, and appropriateness of
emotional response)
(3) interpersonal functioning
(4) impulse control
B. The enduring pattern is inflexible and pervasive across a broad range
of personal and social situations.
C. The enduring pattern leads to clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The pattern is stable and of long duration and its onset can be traced
back at least to adolescence or early adulthood.
E. The enduring pattern is not better accounted for as a manifestation or
consequence of another mental disorder.
F. The enduring pattern is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., head trauma).
Dimensional Models for Personality Disorders
The diagnostic approach used in this manual represents the categorical perspective that
Personality Disorders represent qualitatively distinct clinical syndromes. An alternative
to the categorical approach is the dimensional perspective that Personality Disorders
represent maladaptive variants of personality traits that merge imperceptibly into
normality and into one another. There have been many different attempts to identify
the most fundamental dimensions that underlie the entire domain of normal and
pathological personality functioning. One model consists of the following five dimen-
sions: neuroticism, introversion versus extroversion, closedness versus openness to
experience, antagonism versus agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Another approach
is to describe more specific areas of personality dysfunction, including as many as 15-40
dimensions (e.g., affective reactivity, social apprehensiveness, cognitive distortion,634
Personality Disorders
impulsivity, insincerity, self-centeredness). Other dimensions that have been studied
include novelty seeking, reward dependence, harm avoidance, dominance, affiliation,
constraint, persistence, positive emotionality versus negative emotionality, pleasure
seeking versus pain avoidance, passive accommodation versus active modification, and
self-propagation versus other nurturance. The DSM-IV Personality Disorder clusters (i.e.,
odd-eccentric, dramatic-emotional, and anxious-fearful) may also be viewed as dimen-
sions representing spectra of personality dysfunction on a continuum with Axis I mental
disorders. The relationship of the various dimensional models to the Personality Disorder
diagnostic categories and to various aspects of personality dysfunction remains under
active investigation.
Cluster A Personality Disorders
301.0 Paranoid Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Paranoid Personality Disorder is a pattern of pervasive distrust
and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are interpreted as malevolent. This
pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with this disorder assume that other people will exploit, harm, or deceive
them, even if no evidence exists to support this expectation (Criterion Al). They suspect
on the basis of little or no evidence that others are plotting against them and may attack
them suddenly, at any time and without reason. They often feel that they have been
deeply and irreversibly injured by another person or persons even when there is no
objective evidence for this. They are preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the
loyalty or trustworthiness of their friends and associates, whose actions are minutely
scrutinized for evidence of hostile intentions (Criterion A2). Any perceived deviation
from trustworthiness or loyalty serves to support their underlying assumptions. They are
so amazed when a friend or associate shows loyalty that they cannot trust or believe it.
It they get into trouble, they expect that friends and associates will either attack or ignore
them.
Individuals with this disorder are reluctant to confide in or become close to others
because they fear that the information they share will be used against them (Criterion
A3). They may refuse to answer personal questions, saying that the information is
"nobody's business." They read hidden meanings that are demeaning and threatening
into benign remarks or events (Criterion A4). For example, an individual with this
disorder may misinterpret an honest mistake by a store clerk as a deliberate attempt to
shortchange or may view a casual humorous remark by a co-worker as a serious character
attack. Compliments are often misinterpreted (e.g., a compliment on a new acquisition
is misinterpreted as a criticism for selfishness; a compliment on an accomplishment is
misinterpreted as an attempt to coerce more and better performance). They may view
an offer of help as a criticism that they are not doing well enough on their own.
Individuals with this disorder persistently bear grudges and are unwilling to forgive
the insults, injuries, or slights that they think they have received (Criterion A5). Minor
slights arouse major hostility, and the hostile feelings persist for a long time. Because301.0 Paranoid Personality Disorder
635
they are constantly vigilant to the harmful intentions of others, they very often feel that
their character or reputation has been attacked or that they have been slighted in some
other way. They are quick to counterattack and react with anger to perceived insults
(Criterion A6). Individuals with this disorder may be pathologically jealous, often
suspecting that their spouse or sexual partner is unfaithful without any adequate
justification (Criterion A7). They may gather trivial and circumstantial "evidence" to
support their jealous beliefs. They want to maintain complete control of intimate
relationships to avoid being betrayed and may constantly question and challenge the
whereabouts, actions, intentions, and fidelity of their spouse or partner.
Paranoid Personality Disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior
occurs exclusively during the course of Schizophrenia, a Mood Disorder With Psychotic
Features, or another Psychotic Disorder or if it is due to the direct physiological effects
of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or other general medical condition
(Criterion B).
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Paranoid Personality Disorder are generally difficult to get along with
and often have problems with close relationships. Their excessive suspiciousness and
hostility may be expressed in overt argumentativeness, in recurrent complaining, or by
quiet, apparently hostile aloofness. Because they are hypervigilant for potential threats,
they may act in a guarded, secretive, or devious manner and appear to be "cold" and
lacking in tender feelings. Although they may appear to be objective, rational, and
unemotional, they more often display a labile range of affect, with hostile, stubborn,
and sarcastic expressions predominating. Their combative and suspicious nature may
elicit a hostile response in others, which then serves to confirm their original ex-
pectations.
Because individuals with Paranoid Personality Disorder lack trust in others, they
have an excessive need to be self-sufficient and a strong sense of autonomy. They also
need to have a high degree of control over those around them. They are often rigid,
critical of others, and unable to collaborate, although they have great difficulty accepting
criticism themselves. They may blame others for their own shortcomings. Because of
their quickness to counterattack in response to the threats they perceive around them,
they may be litigious and frequently become involved in legal disputes. Individuals with
this disorder seek to confirm their preconceived negative notions regarding people or
situations they encounter, attributing malevolent motivations to others that are projec-
tions of their own fears. They may exhibit thinly hidden, unrealistic grandiose fantasies,
are often attuned to issues of power and rank, and tend to develop negative stereotypes
of others, particularly those from population groups distinct from their own. Attracted
by simplistic formulations of the world, they are often wary of ambiguous situations.
They may be perceived as "fanatics" and form tightly knit "cults" or groups with others
who share their paranoid belief systems.
Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very
brief psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours). In some instances, Paranoid
Personality Disorder may appear as the premorbid antecedent of Delusional Disorder
or Schizophrenia. Individuals with this disorder may develop Major Depressive Disorder
and may be at increased risk for Agoraphobia and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.
Alcohol and other Substance Abuse or Dependence frequently occur. The most common636
Personality Disorders
co-occurring Personality Disorders appear to be Schizotypal, Schizoid, Narcissistic,
Avoidant, and Borderline.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Some behaviors that are influenced by sociocultural contexts or specific life circum-
stances may be erroneously labeled paranoid and may even be reinforced by the process
of clinical evaluation. Members of minority groups, immigrants, political and economic
refugees, or individuals of different ethnic backgrounds may display guarded or
defensive behaviors due to unfamiliarity (e.g., language barriers or lack of knowledge
of rules and regulations) or in response to the perceived neglect or indifference of the
majority society. These behaviors can, in turn, generate anger and frustration in those
who deal with these individuals, thus setting up a vicious cycle of mutual mistrust, which
should not be confused with Paranoid Personality Disorder. Some ethnic groups also
display culturally related behaviors that can be misinterpreted as paranoid.
Paranoid Personality Disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence
with solitariness, poor peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school,
hypersensitivity, peculiar thoughts and language, and idiosyncratic fantasies. These
children may appear to be "odd" or "eccentric" and attract teasing. In clinical samples,
this disorder appears to be more commonly diagnosed in males.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Paranoid Personality Disorder has been reported to be 0.5%-2.5% in
the general population, 10%-30% among those in inpatient psychiatric settings, and
2%~10% among those in outpatient mental health clinics.
Familial Pattern
There is some evidence for an increased prevalence of Paranoid Personality Disorder in
relatives of probands with chronic Schizophrenia and for a more specific familial
relationship with Delusional Disorder, Persecutory Type.
Differential Diagnosis
Paranoid Personality Disorder can be distinguished from Delusional Disorder, Persec-
utory Type, Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, and Mood Disorder With Psychotic
Features because these disorders are all characterized by a period of persistent psychotic
symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of
Paranoid Personality Disorder, the Personality Disorder must have been present before
the onset of psychotic symptoms and must persist when the psychotic symptoms are in
remission. When an individual has a chronic Axis I Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophre-
nia) that was preceded by Paranoid Personality Disorder, Paranoid Personality Disorder
should be recorded on Axis II, followed by "Premorbid" in parentheses.
Paranoid Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change Due
to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct effects
of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic301.0 Paranoid Personality Disorder
637
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified). Finally, it must
also be distinguished from paranoid traits associated with the development of
physical handicaps (e.g., a hearing impairment).
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Paranoid Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Paranoid Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Paranoid
Personality Disorder and Schizotypal Personality Disorder share the traits of suspi-
ciousness, interpersonal aloofness, and paranoid ideation, but Schizotypal Personality
Disorder also includes symptoms such as magical thinking, unusual perceptual experi-
ences, and odd thinking and speech. Individuals with behaviors that meet criteria for
Schizoid Personality Disorder are often perceived as strange, eccentric, cold, and
aloof, but they do not usually have prominent paranoid ideation. The tendency of
individuals with Paranoid Personality Disorder to react to minor stimuli with anger is
also seen in Borderline and Histrionic Personality Disorders. However, these
disorders are not necessarily associated with pervasive suspiciousness. People with
Avoidant Personality Disorder may also be reluctant to confide in others, but more
because of a fear of being embarrassed or found inadequate than from fear of others'
malicious intent. Although antisocial behavior may be present in some individuals with
Paranoid Personality Disorder, it is not usually motivated by a desire for personal gain
or to exploit others as in Antisocial Personality Disorder, but rather is more often
due to a desire for revenge. Individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder may
occasionally display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation, but this derives
primarily from fears of having their imperfections or flaws revealed.
Paranoid traits may be adaptive, particularly in threatening environments. Paranoid
Personality Disorder should be diagnosed only when these traits are inflexible, maladap-
tive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.0 Paranoid Personality
Disorder
A. A pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others such that their motives
are interpreted as malevolent, beginning by early adulthood and present
in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
(1) suspects, without sufficient basis, that others are exploiting, harm-
ing, or deceiving him or her
(2) is preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trust-
worthiness of friends or associates
(3) is reluctant to confide in others because of unwarranted fear that
the information will be used maliciously against him or her
(4) reads hidden demeaning or threatening meanings into benign
remarks or events
(5) persistently bears grudges, i.e., is unforgiving of insults, injuries, or
slights
(continued)638
Personality Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 301.0 Paranoid Personality Disorder
(continued)
(6) perceives attacks on his or her character or reputation that are not
apparent to others and is quick to react angrily or to counterattack
(7) has recurrent suspicions, without justification, regarding fidelity of
spouse or sexual partner
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of Schizophrenia, a Mood
Disorder With Psychotic Features, or another Psychotic Disorder and is
not due to the direct physiological effects of a general medical condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of Schizophrenia, add "Premorbid," e.g.,
"Paranoid Personality Disorder (Premorbid)."
301.20 Schizoid Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Schizoid Personality Disorder is a pervasive pattern of detach-
ment from social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in
interpersonal settings. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety
of contexts.
Individuals with Schizoid Personality Disorder appear to lack a desire for intimacy,
seem indifferent to opportunities to develop close relationships, and do not seem to
derive much satisfaction from being part of a family or other social group (Criterion Al).
They prefer spending time by themselves, rather than being with other people. They
often appear to be socially isolated or "loners" and almost always choose solitary
activities or hobbies that do not include interaction with others (Criterion A2). They
prefer mechanical or abstract tasks, such as computer or mathematical games. They may
have very little interest in having sexual experiences with another person (Criterion A3)
and take pleasure in few, if any, activities (Criterion A4). There is usually a reduced
experience of pleasure from sensory, bodily, or interpersonal experiences, such as
walking on a beach at sunset or having sex. These individuals have no close friends or
confidants, except possibly a first-degree relative (Criterion A5).
Individuals with Schizoid Personality Disorder often seem indifferent to the approval
or criticism of others and do not appear to be bothered by what others may think of
them (Criterion A6). They may be oblivious to the normal subtleties of social interaction
and often do not respond appropriately to social cues so that they seem socially inept
or superficial and self-absorbed. They usually display a "bland" exterior without visible
emotional reactivity and rarely reciprocate gestures or facial expressions, such as smiles
or nods (Criterion A7). They claim that they rarely experience strong emotions such as
anger and joy. They often display a constricted affect and appear cold and aloof.
However, in those very unusual circumstances in which these individuals become at
least temporarily comfortable in revealing themselves, they may acknowledge having
painful feelings, particularly related to social interactions.301.20 Schizoid Personality Disorder
639
Schizoid Personality Disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior
occurs exclusively during the course of Schizophrenia, a Mood Disorder With Psychotic
Features, another Psychotic Disorder, or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder or if it is
due to the direct physiological effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy)
or other general medical condition (Criterion B).
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Schizoid Personality Disorder may have particular difficulty expressing
anger, even in response to direct provocation, which contributes to the impression that
they lack emotion. Their lives sometimes seem directionless, and they may appear to
"drift" in their goals. Such individuals often react passively to adverse circumstances and
have difficulty responding appropriately to important life events. Because of their lack
of social skills and lack of desire for sexual experiences, individuals with this disorder
have few friendships, date infrequently, and often do not marry. Occupational function-
ing may be impaired, particularly if interpersonal involvement is required, but individuals
with this disorder may do well when they work under conditions of social isolation.
Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very
brief psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours). In some instances, Schizoid
Personality Disorder may appear as the premorbid antecedent of Delusional Disorder
or Schizophrenia. Individuals with this disorder may sometimes develop Major Depres-
sive Disorder. Schizoid Personality Disorder most often co-occurs with Schizotypal,
Paranoid, and Avoidant Personality Disorders.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Individuals from a variety of cultural backgrounds sometimes exhibit defensive behaviors
and interpersonal styles that may be erroneously labeled as schizoid. For example, those
who have moved from rural to metropolitan environments may react with "emotional
freezing" that may last for several months and be manifested by solitary activities,
constricted affect, and other deficits in communication. Immigrants from other countries
are sometimes mistakenly perceived as cold, hostile, or indifferent.
Schizoid Personality Disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence
with solitariness, poor peer relationships, and underachievement in school, which mark
these children or adolescents as different and make them subject to teasing.
Schizoid Personality Disorder is diagnosed slightly more often in males and may
cause more impairment in them.
Prevalence
Schizoid Personality Disorder is uncommon in clinical settings.
Familial Pattern
Schizoid Personality Disorder may have increased prevalence in the relatives of
individuals with Schizophrenia or Schizotypal Personality Disorder.640
Personality Disorders
Differential
Diagnosis
Schizoid Personality Disorder can be distinguished from Delusional Disorder, Schizo-
phrenia, and Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features because these disorders are
all characterized by a period of persistent psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and
hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of Schizoid Personality Disorder, the
Personality Disorder must have been present before the onset of psychotic symptoms
and must persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an individual
has a chronic Axis I Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia) that was preceded by
Schizoid Personality Disorder, Schizoid Personality Disorder should be recorded on Axis
II followed by "Premorbid" in parentheses.
There may be great difficulty differentiating individuals with Schizoid Personality
Disorder from those with milder forms of Autistic Disorder and from those with
Asperger's Disorder. Milder forms of Autistic Disorder and Asperger's Disorder are
differentiated by more severely impaired social interaction and stereotyped behaviors
and interests.
Schizoid Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change Due
to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct effects
of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Schizoid Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Schizoid Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although
characteristics of social isolation and restricted affectivity are common to Schizoid,
Schizotypal, and Paranoid Personality Disorders, Schizoid Personality Disorder can be
distinguished from Schizotypal Personality Disorder by the lack of cognitive and
perceptual distortions and from Paranoid Personality Disorder by the lack of
suspiciousness and paranoid ideation. The social isolation of Schizoid Personality
Disorder can be distinguished from that of Avoidant Personality Disorder, which is
due to fear of being embarrassed or found inadequate and excessive anticipation of
rejection. In contrast, people with Schizoid Personality Disorder have a more pervasive
detachment and limited desire for social intimacy. Individuals with Obsessive-
Compulsive Personality Disorder may also show an apparent social detachment
stemming from devotion to work and discomfort with emotions, but they do have an
underlying capacity for intimacy.
Individuals who are "loners" may display personality traits that might be considered
schizoid. Only when these traits are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant
functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute Schizoid Personality
Disorder.301.22 Schizotypal Personality Disorder
641
Diagnostic criteria for 301.20 Schizoid Personality
Disorder
A. A pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships and a
restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal settings,
beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as
indicated by four (or more) of the following:
(1) neither desires nor enjoys close relationships, including being part
of a family
(2) almost always chooses solitary activities
(3) has little, if any, interest in having sexual experiences with another
person
(4) takes pleasure in few, if any, activities
(5) lacks close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives
(6) appears indifferent to the praise or criticism of others
(7) shows emotional coldness, detachment, or flattened affectivity
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of Schizophrenia, a Mood
Disorder With Psychotic Features, another Psychotic Disorder, or a
Pervasive Developmental Disorder and is not due to the direct physio-
logical effects of a general medical condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of Schizophrenia, add "Premorbid," e.g.,
"Schizoid Personality Disorder (Premorbid)."
301.22 Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Schizotypal Personality Disorder is a pervasive pattern of social
and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for,
close relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of
behavior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of
contexts.
Individuals with Schizotypal Personality Disorder often have ideas of reference (i.e.,
incorrect interpretations of casual incidents and external events as having a particular
and unusual meaning specifically for the person) (Criterion Al). These should be
distinguished from delusions of reference, in which the beliefs are held with delusional
conviction. These individuals may be superstitious or preoccupied with paranormal
phenomena that are outside the norms of their subculture (Criterion A2). They may feel
that they have special powers to sense events before they happen or to read others'
thoughts. They may believe that they have magical control over others, which can be
implemented directly (e.g., believing that their spouse taking the dog out for a walk is
the direct result of thinking it should be done an hour earlier) or indirectly through
compliance with magical rituals (e.g., walking past a specific object three times to avoid
a certain harmful outcome). Perceptual alterations may be present (e.g., sensing that642
Personality Disorders
another person is present or hearing a voice murmuring his or her name) (Criterion A3).
Their speech may include unusual or idiosyncratic phrasing and construction. It is often
loose, digressive, or vague, but without actual derailment or incoherence (Criterion A4).
Responses can be either overly concrete or overly abstract, and words or concepts are
sometimes applied in unusual ways (e.g., the person may state that he or she was not
"talkable" at work).
Individuals with this disorder are often suspicious and may have paranoid ideation
(e.g., believing their colleagues at work are intent on undermining their reputation with
the boss) (Criterion A5). They are usually not able to negotiate the full range of affects
and interpersonal cuing required for successful relationships and thus often appear to
interact with others in an inappropriate, stiff, or constricted fashion (Criterion A6). These
individuals are often considered to be odd or eccentric because of unusual mannerisms,
an often unkempt manner of dress that does not quite "fit together," and inattention to
the usual social conventions (e.g., the person may avoid eye contact, wear clothes that
are ink stained and ill-fitting, and be unable to join in the give-and-take banter of
co-workers) (Criterion A7).
Individuals with Schizotypal Personality Disorder experience interpersonal related-
ness as problematic and are uncomfortable relating to other people. Although they may
express unhappiness about their lack of relationships, their behavior suggests a
decreased desire for intimate contacts. As a result, they usually have no or few close
friends or confidants other than a first-degree relative (Criterion A8). They are anxious
in social situations, particularly those involving unfamiliar people (Criterion A9). They
will interact with other people when they have to, but prefer to keep to themselves
because they feel that they are different and just do not "fit in." Their social anxiety does
not easily abate, even when they spend more time in the setting or become more familiar
with the other people, because their anxiety tends to be associated with suspiciousness
regarding others' motivations. For example, when attending a dinner party, the individual
with Schizotypal Personality Disorder will not become more relaxed as time goes on,
but rather may become increasingly tense and suspicious.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior
occurs exclusively during the course of Schizophrenia, a Mood Disorder With Psychotic
Features, another Psychotic Disorder, or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder (Crite-
rion B).
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Schizotypal Personality Disorder often seek treatment for the associated
symptoms of anxiety, depression, or other dysphoric affects rather than for the
personality disorder features per se. Particularly in response to stress, individuals with
this disorder may experience transient psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours),
although they usually are insufficient in duration to warrant an additional diagnosis such
as Brief Psychotic Disorder or Schizophreniform Disorder. In some cases, clinically
significant psychotic symptoms may develop that meet criteria for Brief Psychotic
Disorder, Schizophreniform Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Schizophrenia. Over half
may have a history of at least one Major Depressive Episode. From 30% to 50% of
individuals diagnosed with this disorder have a concurrent diagnosis of Major Depressive
Disorder when admitted to a clinical setting. There is considerable co-occurrence with
Schizoid, Paranoid, Avoidant, and Borderline Personality Disorders.301.22 Schizotypal Personality Disorder
643
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Cognitive and perceptual distortions must be evaluated in the context of the individual's
cultural milieu. Pervasive culturally determined characteristics, particularly those regard-
ing religious beliefs and rituals, can appear to be schizotypal to the uninformed outsider
(e.g., voodoo, speaking in tongues, life beyond death, shamanism, mind reading, sixth
sense, evil eye, and magical beliefs related to health and illness).
Schizotypal Personality Disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence
with solitariness, poor peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school,
hypersensitivity, peculiar thoughts and language, and bizarre fantasies. These children
may appear "odd" or "eccentric" and attract teasing. Schizotypal Personality Disorder
may be slightly more common in males.
Prevalence
Schizotypal Personality Disorder has been reported to occur in approximately 3% of the
general population.
Course
Schizotypal Personality Disorder has a relatively stable course, with only a small
proportion of individuals going on to develop Schizophrenia or another Psychotic
Disorder.
Familial Pattern
Schizotypal Personality Disorder appears to aggregate familially and is more prevalent
among the first-degree biological relatives of individuals with Schizophrenia than among
the general population. There may also be a modest increase in Schizophrenia and other
Psychotic Disorders in the relatives of probands with Schizotypal Personality
Disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Schizotypal Personality Disorder can be distinguished from Delusional Disorder,
Schizophrenia, and Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features because these disor-
ders are all characterized by a period of persistent psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions
and hallucinations). To give an additional diagnosis of Schizotypal Personality Disorder,
the Personality Disorder must have been present before the onset of psychotic symptoms
and persist when the psychotic symptoms are in remission. When an individual has a
chronic Axis I Psychotic Disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia) that was preceded by Schizotypal
Personality Disorder, Schizotypal Personality Disorder should be recorded on Axis II
followed by "Premorbid" in parentheses.
There may be great difficulty differentiating children with Schizotypal Personality
Disorder from the heterogeneous group of solitary, odd children whose behavior is
characterized by marked social isolation, eccentricity, or peculiarities of language and
whose diagnoses would probably include milder forms of Autistic Disorder,
Asperger's Disorder, and Expressive and Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language644
Personality Disorders
Disorders. Communication Disorders may be differentiated by the primacy and
severity of the disorder in language accompanied by compensatory efforts by the child
to communicate by other means (e.g., gestures) and by the characteristic features of
impaired language found in a specialized language assessment. Milder forms of Autistic
Disorder and Asperger's Disorder are differentiated by the even greater lack of social
awareness and emotional reciprocity and stereotyped behaviors and interests.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change
Due to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct
effects of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Schizotypal Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Schizotypal Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although
Paranoid and Schizoid Personality Disorders may also be characterized by social
detachment and restricted affect, Schizotypal Personality Disorder can be distinguished
from these two diagnoses by the presence of cognitive or perceptual distortions and
marked eccentricity or oddness. Close relationships are limited in both Schizotypal
Personality Disorder and Avoidant Personality Disorder; however, in Avoidant
Personality Disorder an active desire for relationships is constrained by a fear of rejection,
whereas in Schizotypal Personality Disorder there is a lack of desire for relationships
and persistent detachment. Individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder may
also display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation, but in Narcissistic Person-
ality Disorder these qualities derive primarily from fears of having imperfections or flaws
revealed. Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder may also have transient,
psychotic-like symptoms, but these are usually more closely related to affective shifts in
response to stress (e.g., intense anger, anxiety, or disappointment) and are usually more
dissociative (e.g., derealization or depersonalization). In contrast, individuals with
Schizotypal Personality Disorder are more likely to have enduring psychotic-like
symptoms that may worsen under stress but are less likely to be invariably associated
with pronounced affective symptoms. Although social isolation may occur in Borderline
Personality Disorder, this is usually secondary to repeated interpersonal failures due to
angry outbursts and frequent mood shifts, rather than a result of a persistent lack of
social contacts and desire for intimacy. Furthermore, individuals with Schizotypal
Personality Disorder do not usually demonstrate the impulsive or manipulative behaviors
of the individual with Borderline Personality Disorder. However, there is a high rate of
co-occurrence between the two disorders, so that making such distinctions is not always
feasible. Schizotypal features during adolescence may be reflective of transient
emotional turmoil, rather than an enduring personality disorder.301.7 Antisocial Personality Disorder
645
Diagnostic criteria for 301.22 Schizotypal Personality
Disorder
A. A pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute
discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close relationships as well
as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of behavior,
beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as
indicated by five (or more) of the following:
(1) ideas of reference (excluding delusions of reference)
(2) odd beliefs or magical thinking that influences behavior and is
inconsistent with subcultural norms (e.g., superstitiousness, belief
in clairvoyance, telepathy, or "sixth sense"; in children and adoles-
cents, bizarre fantasies or preoccupations)
(3) unusual perceptual experiences, including bodily illusions
(4) odd thinking and speech (e.g., vague, circumstantial, metaphorical,
overelaborate, or stereotyped)
(5) suspiciousness or paranoid ideation
(6) inappropriate or constricted affect
(7) behavior or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar
(8) lack of close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives
(9) excessive social anxiety that does not diminish with familiarity and
tends to be associated with paranoid fears rather than negative
judgments about self
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of Schizophrenia, a Mood
Disorder With Psychotic Features, another Psychotic Disorder, or a
Pervasive Developmental Disorder.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of Schizophrenia, add "Premorbid," e.g.,
"Schizotypal Personality Disorder (Premorbid)."
Cluster B Personality Disorders
301.7 Antisocial Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Antisocial Personality Disorder is a pervasive pattern of disregard
for, and violation of, the rights of others that begins in childhood or early adolescence
and continues into adulthood.
This pattern has also been referred to as psychopathy, sociopathy, or dyssocial
personality disorder. Because deceit and manipulation are central features of Antisocial
Personality Disorder, it may be especially helpful to integrate information acquired from646
Personality Disorders
systematic clinical assessment with information collected from collateral sources.
For this diagnosis to be given, the individual must be at least age 18 years (Criterion
B) and must have had a history of some symptoms of Conduct Disorder before age
15 years (Criterion C). Conduct Disorder involves a repetitive and persistent pattern of
behavior in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or
rules are violated. The specific behaviors characteristic of Conduct Disorder fall into one
of four categories: aggression to people and animals, destruction of property, deceit-
fulness or theft, or serious violation of rules. These are described in more detail on p. 85.
The pattern of antisocial behavior continues into adulthood. Individuals with
Antisocial Personality Disorder fail to conform to social norms with respect to lawful
behavior (Criterion Al). They may repeatedly perform acts that are grounds for arrest
(whether they are arrested or not), such as destroying property, harassing others, stealing,
or pursuing illegal occupations. Persons with this disorder disregard the wishes, rights,
or feelings of others. They are frequently deceitful and manipulative in order to gain
personal profit or pleasure (e.g., to obtain money, sex, or power) (Criterion A2). They
may repeatedly lie, use an alias, con others, or malinger. A pattern of impulsivity may
be manifested by a failure to plan ahead (Criterion A3). Decisions are made on the spur
of the moment, without forethought, and without consideration for the consequences
to self or others; this may lead to sudden changes of jobs, residences, or relationships.
Individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder tend to be irritable and aggressive and
may repeatedly get into physical fights or commit acts of physical assault (including
spouse beating or child beating) (Criterion A4). Aggressive acts that are required to
defend oneself or someone else are not considered to be evidence for this item. These
individuals also display a reckless disregard for the safety of themselves or others
(Criterion A5). This may be evidenced in their driving behavior (recurrent speeding,
driving while intoxicated, multiple accidents). They may engage in sexual behavior or
substance use that has a high risk for harmful consequences. They may neglect or fail
to care for a child in a way that puts the child in danger.
Individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder also tend to be consistently and
extremely irresponsible (Criterion A6). Irresponsible work behavior may be indicated
by significant periods of unemployment despite available job opportunities, or by
abandonment of several jobs without a realistic plan for getting another job. There may
also be a pattern of repeated absences from work that are not explained by illness either
in themselves or in their family. Financial irresponsibility is indicated by acts such as
defaulting on debts, failing to provide child support, or failing to support other
dependents on a regular basis. Individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder show
little remorse for the consequences of their acts (Criterion A7). They may be indifferent
to, or provide a superficial rationalization for, having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from
someone (e.g., "life's unfair," "losers deserve to lose," or "he had it coming anyway").
These individuals may blame the victims for being foolish, helpless, or deserving their
fate; they may minimize the harmful consequences of their actions; or they may simply
indicate complete indifference. They generally fail to compensate or make amends for
their behavior. They may believe that everyone is out to "help number one" and that
one should stop at nothing to avoid being pushed around.
The antisocial behavior must not occur exclusively during the course of Schizophre-
nia or a Manic Episode (Criterion D).301.7 Antisocial Personality Disorder
647
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder frequently lack empathy and tend to be
callous, cynical, and contemptuous of the feelings, rights, and sufferings of others. They
may have an inflated and arrogant self-appraisal (e.g., feel that ordinary work is beneath
them or lack a realistic concern about their current problems or their future) and may
be excessively opinionated, self-assured, or cocky. They may display a glib, superficial
charm and can be quite voluble and verbally facile (e.g., using technical terms or jargon
that might impress someone who is unfamiliar with the topic). Lack of empathy, inflated
self-appraisal, and superficial charm are features that have been commonly included in
traditional conceptions of psychopathy and may be particularly distinguishing of
Antisocial Personality Disorder in prison or forensic settings where criminal, delinquent,
or aggressive acts are likely to be nonspecific. These individuals may also be irrespon-
sible and exploitative in their sexual relationships. They may have a history of many
sexual partners and may never have sustained a monogamous relationship. They may
be irresponsible as parents, as evidenced by malnutrition of a child, an illness in the
child resulting from a lack of minimal hygiene, a child's dependence on neighbors or
nonresident relatives for food or shelter, a failure to arrange for a caretaker for a young
child when the individual is away from home, or repeated squandering of money
required for household necessities. These individuals may receive dishonorable dis-
charges from the armed services, may fail to be self-supporting, may become im-
poverished or even homeless, or may spend many years in penal institutions. Individuals
with Antisocial Personality Disorder are more likely than people in the general
population to die prematurely by violent means (e.g., suicide, accidents, and homicides).
Individuals with this disorder may also experience dysphoria, including complaints
of tension, inability to tolerate boredom, and depressed mood. They may have associated
Anxiety Disorders, Depressive Disorders, Substance-Related Disorders, Somatization
Disorder, Pathological Gambling, and other disorders of impulse control. Individuals
with Antisocial Personality Disorder also often have personality features that meet criteria
for other Personality Disorders, particularly Borderline, Histrionic, and Narcissistic
Personality Disorders. The likelihood of developing Antisocial Personality Disorder in
adult life is increased if the individual experienced an early onset of Conduct Disorder
(before age 10 years) and accompanying Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Child
abuse or neglect, unstable or erratic parenting, or inconsistent parental discipline may
increase the likelihood that Conduct Disorder will evolve into Antisocial Personality
Disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Antisocial Personality Disorder appears to be associated with low socioeconomic status
and urban settings. Concerns have been raised that the diagnosis may at times be
misapplied to individuals in settings in which seemingly antisocial behavior may be part
of a protective survival strategy. In assessing antisocial traits, it is helpful for the clinician
to consider the social and economic context in which the behaviors occur.
By definition, Antisocial Personality cannot be diagnosed before age 18 years.
Antisocial Personality Disorder is much more common in males than in females. There
has been some concern that Antisocial Personality Disorder may be underdiagnosed in
females, particularly because of the emphasis on aggressive items in the definition of
Conduct Disorder.648
Personality Disorders
Prevalence
The overall prevalence of Antisocial Personality Disorder in community samples is about
3% in males and about 1% in females. Prevalence estimates within clinical settings have
varied from 3% to 30%, depending on the predominant characteristics of the populations
being sampled. Even higher prevalence rates are associated with substance abuse
treatment settings and prison or forensic settings.
Course
Antisocial Personality Disorder has a chronic course but may become less evident or
remit as the individual grows older, particularly by the fourth decade of life. Although
this remission tends to be particularly evident with respect to engaging in criminal
behavior, there is likely to be a decrease in the full spectrum of antisocial behaviors and
substance use.
Familial Pattern
Antisocial Personality Disorder is more common among the first-degree biological
relatives of those with the disorder than among the general population. The risk to
biological relatives of females with the disorder tends to be higher than the risk to
biological relatives of males with the disorder. Biological relatives of persons with this
disorder are also at increased risk for Somatization Disorder and Substance-Related
Disorders. Within a family that has a member with Antisocial Personality Disorder, males
more often have Antisocial Personality Disorder and Substance-Related Disorders,
whereas females more often have Somatization Disorder. However, in such families,
there is an increase in prevalence of all of these disorders in both males and females
compared with the general population. Adoption studies indicate that both genetic and
environmental factors contribute to the risk of this group of disorders. Both adopted and
biological children of parents with Antisocial Personality Disorder have an increased risk
of developing Antisocial Personality Disorder, Somatization Disorder, and Substance-
Related Disorders. Adopted-away children resemble their biological parents more than
their adoptive parents, but the adoptive family environment influences the risk of
developing a Personality Disorder and related psychopathology.
Differential
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder is not given to individuals under age
18 years and is given only if there is a history of some symptoms of Conduct Disorder
before age 15 years. For individuals over age 18 years, a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder
is given only if the criteria for Antisocial Personality Disorder are not met.
When antisocial behavior in an adult is associated with a Substance-Related
Disorder, the diagnosis of Antisocial Personality Disorder is not made unless the signs
of Antisocial Personality Disorder were also present in childhood and have continued
into adulthood. When substance use and antisocial behavior both began in childhood
and continued into adulthood, both a Substance-Related Disorder and Antisocial
Personality Disorder should be diagnosed if the criteria for both are met, even though
some antisocial acts may be a consequence of the Substance-Related Disorder (e.g.,301.7 Antisocial Personality Disorder
649
illegal selling of drugs or thefts to obtain money for drugs). Antisocial behavior that
occurs exclusively during the course of Schizophrenia or a Manic Episode should
not be diagnosed as Antisocial Personality Disorder.
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Antisocial Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Antisocial Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals
with Antisocial Personality Disorder and Narcissistic Personality Disorder share a
tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial, exploitative, and unempathic. However,
Narcissistic Personality Disorder does not include characteristics of impulsivity, aggres-
sion, and deceit. In addition, individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder may not
be as needy of the admiration and envy of others, and persons with Narcissistic
Personality Disorder usually lack the history of Conduct Disorder in childhood or criminal
behavior in adulthood. Individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder and Histrionic
Personality Disorder share a tendency to be impulsive, superficial, excitement seeking,
reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons with Histrionic Personality Disorder
tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions and do not characteristically engage in
antisocial behaviors. Individuals with Histrionic and Borderline Personality Disorders
are manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with Antisocial Personality Disorder
are manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification. Individuals
with Antisocial Personality Disorder tend to be less emotionally unstable and more
aggressive than those with Borderline Personality Disorder. Although antisocial behavior
may be present in some individuals with Paranoid Personality Disorder, it is not
usually motivated by a desire for personal gain or to exploit others as in Antisocial
Personality Disorder, but rather is more often due to a desire for revenge.
Antisocial Personality Disorder must be distinguished from criminal behavior
undertaken for gain that is not accompanied by the personality features characteristic
of this disorder. Adult Antisocial Behavior (listed in the "Other Conditions That May
Be a Focus of Clinical Attention" section, p. 683) can be used to describe criminal,
aggressive, or other antisocial behavior that comes to clinical attention but that does not
meet the full criteria for Antisocial Personality Disorder. Only when antisocial personality
traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persistent and cause significant functional impair-
ment or subjective distress do they constitute Antisocial Personality Disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.7 Antisocial Personality
Disorder
A. There is a pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights
of others occurring since age 15 years, as indicated by three (or more)
of the following:
(1) failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors
as indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for
arrest
(continued)650
Personality Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 301.7 Antisocial Personality
Disorder (continued)
(2) deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or
conning others for personal profit or pleasure
(3) impulsivity or failure to plan ahead
(4) irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical
fights or assaults
(5) reckless disregard for safety of self or others
(6) consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to
sustain consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations
(7) lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing
having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from another
B. The individual is at least age 18 years.
C. There is evidence of Conduct Disorder (see p. 90) with onset before age
15 years.
D. The occurrence of antisocial behavior is not exclusively during the
course of Schizophrenia or a Manic Episode.
301.83 Borderline Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Borderline Personality Disorder is a pervasive pattern of
instability of interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects, and marked impulsivity
that begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder make frantic efforts to avoid real
or imagined abandonment (Criterion 1). The perception of impending separation or
rejection, or the loss of external structure, can lead to profound changes in self-image,
affect, cognition, and behavior. These individuals are very sensitive to environmental
circumstances. They experience intense abandonment fears and inappropriate anger
even when faced with a realistic time-limited separation or when there are unavoidable
changes in plans (e.g., sudden despair in reaction to a clinician's announcing the end
of the hour; panic or fury when someone important to them is just a few minutes late
or must cancel an appointment). They may believe that this "abandonment" implies they
are "bad." These abandonment fears are related to an intolerance of being alone and a
need to have other people with them. Their frantic efforts to avoid abandonment may
include impulsive actions such as self-mutilating or suicidal behaviors, which are
described separately in Criterion 5.
Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder have a pattern of unstable and
intense relationships (Criterion 2). They may idealize potential caregivers or lovers at
the first or second meeting, demand to spend a lot of time together, and share the most301.83 Borderline Personality Disorder
651
intimate details early in a relationship. However, they may switch quickly from idealizing
other people to devaluing them, feeling that the other person does not care enough,
does not give enough, is not "there" enough. These individuals can empathize with and
nurture other people, but only with the expectation that the other person will "be there"
in return to meet their own needs on demand. These individuals are prone to sudden
and dramatic shifts in their view of others, who may alternately be seen as beneficent
supports or as cruelly punitive. Such shifts often reflect disillusionment with a caregiver
whose nurturing qualities had been idealized or whose rejection or abandonment is
expected.
There may be an identity disturbance characterized by markedly and persistently
unstable self-image or sense of self (Criterion 3). There are sudden and dramatic shifts
in self-image, characterized by shifting goals, values, and vocational aspirations. There
may be sudden changes in opinions and plans about career, sexual identity, values, and
types of friends. These individuals may suddenly change from the role of a needy
supplicant for help to a righteous avenger of past mistreatment. Although they usually
have a self-image that is based on being bad or evil, individuals with this disorder may
at times have feelings that they do not exist at all. Such experiences usually occur in
situations in which the individual feels a lack of a meaningful relationship, nurturing,
and support. These individuals may show worse performance in unstructured work or
school situations.
Individuals with this disorder display impulsivity in at least two areas that are
potentially self-damaging (Criterion 4). They may gamble, spend money irresponsibly,
binge eat, abuse substances, engage in unsafe sex, or drive recklessly. Individuals with
Borderline Personality Disorder display recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats,
or self-mutilating behavior (Criterion 5). Completed suicide occurs in 8%-10% of such
individuals, and self-mutilative acts (e.g., cutting or burning) and suicide threats and
attempts are very common. Recurrent suicidality is often the reason that these individuals
present for help. These self-destructive acts are usually precipitated by threats of
separation or rejection or by expectations that they assume increased responsibility.
Self-mutilation may occur during dissociative experiences and often brings relief by
reaffirming the ability to feel or by expiating the individual's sense of being evil.
Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder may display affective instability that
is due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense episodic dysphoria, irritability, or
anxiety usually lasting a few hours and only rarely more than a few days) (Criterion 6).
The basic dysphoric mood of those with Borderline Personality Disorder is often
disrupted by periods of anger, panic, or despair and is rarely relieved by periods of
well-being or satisfaction. These episodes may reflect the individual's extreme reactivity
to interpersonal stresses. Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder may be
troubled by chronic feelings of emptiness (Criterion 7). Easily bored, they may constantly
seek something to do. Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder frequently
express inappropriate, intense anger or have difficulty controlling their anger (Criterion
8). They may display extreme sarcasm, enduring bitterness, or verbal outbursts. The
anger is often elicited when a caregiver or lover is seen as neglectful, withholding,
uncaring, or abandoning. Such expressions of anger are often followed by shame and
guilt and contribute to the feeling they have of being evil. During periods of extreme
stress, transient paranoid ideation or dissociative symptoms (e.g., depersonalization)
may occur (Criterion 9), but these are generally of insufficient severity or duration to
warrant an additional diagnosis. These episodes occur most frequently in response to a
real or imagined abandonment. Symptoms tend to be transient, lasting minutes or hours.652
Personality Disorders
The real or perceived return of the caregiver's nurturance may result in a remission of
symptoms.
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder may have a pattern of undermining
themselves at the moment a goal is about to be realized (e.g., dropping out of school
just before graduation; regressing severely after a discussion of how well therapy is
going; destroying a good relationship just when it is clear that the relationship could
last). Some individuals develop psychotic-like symptoms (e.g., hallucinations, body-
image distortions, ideas of reference, and hypnagogic phenomena) during times of stress.
Individuals with this disorder may feel more secure with transitional objects (i.e., a pet
or inanimate possession) than in interpersonal relationships. Premature death from
suicide may occur in individuals with this disorder, especially in those with co-occurring
Mood Disorders or Substance-Related Disorders. Physical handicaps may result from
self-inflicted abuse behaviors or failed suicide attempts. Recurrent job losses, interrupted
education, and broken marriages are common. Physical and sexual abuse, neglect,
hostile conflict, and early parental loss or separation are more common in the childhood
histories of those with Borderline Personality Disorder. Common co-occurring Axis I
disorders include Mood Disorders, Substance-Related Disorders, Eating Disorders (no-
tably Bulimia), Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disor-
der. Borderline Personality Disorder also frequently co-occurs with the other Personality
Disorders.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
The pattern of behavior seen in Borderline Personality Disorder has been identified in
many settings around the world. Adolescents and young adults with identity problems
(especially when accompanied by substance use) may transiently display behaviors that
misleadingly give the impression of Borderline Personality Disorder. Such situations are
characterized by emotional instability, "existential" dilemmas, uncertainty, anxiety-
provoking choices, conflicts about sexual orientation, and competing social pressures
to decide on careers. Borderline Personality Disorder is diagnosed predominantly (about
75%) in females.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Borderline Personality Disorder is estimated to be about 2% of the
general population, about 10% among individuals seen in outpatient mental health
clinics, and about 20% among psychiatric inpatients. It ranges from 30% to 60% among
clinical populations with Personality Disorders.
Course
There is considerable variability in the course of Borderline Personality Disorder. The
most common pattern is one of chronic instability in early adulthood, with episodes of
serious affective and impulsive dyscontrol and high levels of use of health and mental
health resources. The impairment from the disorder and the risk of suicide are greatest301.83 Borderline Personality Disorder
653
in the young-adult years and gradually wane with advancing age. During their 30s and
40s, the majority of individuals with this disorder attain greater stability in their
relationships and vocational functioning.
Familial Pattern
Borderline Personality Disorder is about five times more common among first-degree
biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the general population. There is
also an increased familial risk for Substance-Related Disorders, Antisocial Personality
Disorder, and Mood Disorders.
Differential Diagnosis
Borderline Personality Disorder often co-occurs with Mood Disorders, and when
criteria for both are met, both may be diagnosed. Because the cross-sectional presenta
tion of Borderline Personality Disorder can be mimicked by an episode of Mood
Disorder, the clinician should avoid giving an additional diagnosis of Borderline
Personality Disorder based only on cross-sectional presentation without having docu-
mented that the pattern of behavior has an early onset and a long-standing course.
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Borderline Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Borderline Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although
Histrionic Personality Disorder can also be characterized by attention seeking,
manipulative behavior, and rapidly shifting emotions, Borderline Personality Disorder
is distinguished by self-destructiveness, angry disruptions in close relationships, and
chronic feelings of deep emptiness and loneliness. Paranoid ideas or illusions may be
present in both Borderline Personality Disorder and Schizotypal Personality Disorder,
but these symptoms are more transient, interpersonally reactive, and responsive to
external structuring in Borderline Personality Disorder. Although Paranoid Personality
Disorder and Narcissistic Personality Disorder may also be characterized by an
angry reaction to minor stimuli, the relative stability of self-image as well as the relative
lack of self-destructiveness, impulsivity, and abandonment concerns distinguish these
disorders from Borderline Personality Disorder. Although Antisocial Personality
Disorder and Borderline Personality Disorder are both characterized by manipulative
behavior, individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder are manipulative to gain profit,
power, or some other material gratification, whereas the goal in Borderline Personality
Disorder is directed more toward gaining the concern of caretakers. Both Dependent
Personality Disorder and Borderline Personality Disorder are characterized by fear of
abandonment; however, the individual with Borderline Personality Disorder reacts to
abandonment with feelings of emotional emptiness, rage, and demands, whereas the
individual with Dependent Personality Disorder reacts with increasing appeasement and
submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement relationship to provide caregiving and
support. Borderline Personality Disorder can further be distinguished from Dependent
Personality Disorder by the typical pattern of unstable and intense relationships.
Borderline Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change
Due to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct654
Personality Disorders
effects of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Borderline Personality Disorder should be distinguished from Identity Problem
(see p. 685), which is reserved for identity concerns related to a developmental phase
(e.g., adolescence) and does not qualify as a mental disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.83 Borderline Personality
Disorder
A pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal relationships, self-image,
and affects, and marked impulsivity beginning by early adulthood and
present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the
following:
(1) frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. Note: Do
not include suicidal or self-mutilating behavior covered in Crite-
rion 5.
(2) a pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships char-
acterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and
devaluation
(3) identity disturbance: markedly and persistently unstable self-image
or sense of self
(4) impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damaging
(e.g., spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge
eating). Note: Do not include suicidal or self-mutilating behavior
covered in Criterion 5.
(5) recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilating
behavior
(6) affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense
episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety usually lasting a few
hours and only rarely more than a few days)
(7) chronic feelings of emptiness
(8) inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger (e.g.,
frequent displays of temper, constant anger, recurrent physical
fights)
(9) transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative
symptoms301.50 Histrionic Personality Disorder
655
301.50 Histrionic Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Histrionic Personality Disorder is pervasive and excessive
emotionality and attention-seeking behavior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and
is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with Histrionic Personality Disorder are uncomfortable or feel unappre-
ciated when they are not the center of attention (Criterion 1). Often lively and dramatic,
they tend to draw attention to themselves and may initially charm new acquaintances
by their enthusiasm, apparent openness, or flirtatiousness. These qualities wear thin,
however, as these individuals continually demand to be the center of attention. They
commandeer the role of "the life of the party." If they are not the center of attention,
they may do something dramatic (e.g., make up stories, create a scene) to draw the
focus of attention to themselves. This need is often apparent in their behavior with a
clinician (e.g., flattery, bringing gifts, providing dramatic descriptions of physical and
psychological symptoms that are replaced by new symptoms each visit).
The appearance and behavior of individuals with this disorder are often inappro-
priately sexually provocative or seductive (Criterion 2). This behavior is directed not
only toward persons in whom the individual has a sexual or romantic interest, but occurs
in a wide variety of social, occupational, and professional relationships beyond what is
appropriate for the social context. Emotional expression may be shallow and rapidly
shifting (Criterion 3). Individuals with this disorder consistently use physical appearance
to draw attention to themselves (Criterion 4). They are overly concerned with impressing
others by their appearance and expend an excessive amount of time, energy, and money
on clothes and grooming. They may "fish for compliments" regarding appearance and
be easily and excessively upset by a critical comment about how they look or by a
photograph that they regard as unflattering.
These individuals have a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and
lacking in detail (Criterion 5). Strong opinions are expressed with dramatic flair, but
underlying reasons are usually vague and diffuse, without supporting facts and details.
For example, an individual with Histrionic Personality Disorder may comment that a
certain individual is a wonderful human being, yet be unable to provide any specific
examples of good qualities to support this opinion. Individuals with this disorder are
characterized by self-dramatization, theatricality, and an exaggerated expression of
emotion (Criterion 6). They may embarrass friends and acquaintances by an excessive
public display of emotions (e.g., embracing casual acquaintances with excessive ardor,
sobbing uncontrollably on minor sentimental occasions, or having temper tantrums).
However, their emotions often seem to be turned on and off too quickly to be deeply
felt, which may lead others to accuse the individual of faking these feelings.
Individuals with Histrionic Personality Disorder have a high degree of suggestibility
(Criterion 7). Their opinions and feelings are easily influenced by others and by current
fads. They may be overly trusting, especially of strong authority figures whom they see
as magically solving their problems. They have a tendency to play hunches and to adopt
convictions quickly. Individuals with this disorder often consider relationships more
intimate than they actually are, describing almost every acquaintance as "my dear, dear
friend" or referring to physicians met only once or twice under professional circum-
stances by their first names (Criterion 8). Flights into romantic fantasy are common.656
Personality Disorders
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Histrionic Personality Disorder may have difficulty achieving emotional
intimacy in romantic or sexual relationships. Without being aware of it, they often act
out a role (e.g., "victim" or "princess") in their relationships to others. They may seek to
control their partner through emotional manipulation or seductiveness on one level,
whereas displaying a marked dependency on them at another level. Individuals with
this disorder often have impaired relationships with same-sex friends because their
sexually provocative interpersonal style may seem a threat to their friends' relationships.
These individuals may also alienate friends with demands for constant attention. They
often become depressed and upset when they are not the center of attention. They may
crave novelty, stimulation, and excitement and have a tendency to become bored with
their usual routine. These individuals are often intolerant of, or frustrated by, situations
that involve delayed gratification, and their actions are often directed at obtaining
immediate satisfaction. Although they often initiate a job or project with great enthusiasm,
their interest may lag quickly. Longer-term relationships may be neglected to make way
for the excitement of new relationships.
The actual risk of suicide is not known, but clinical experience suggests that
individuals with this disorder are at increased risk for suicidal gestures and threats to get
attention and coerce better caregiving. Histrionic Personality Disorder has been associ-
ated with higher rates of Somatization Disorder, Conversion Disorder, and Major
Depressive Disorder. Borderline, Narcissistic, Antisocial, and Dependent Personality
Disorders often co-occur.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
Norms for interpersonal behavior, personal appearance, and emotional expressiveness
vary widely across cultures, genders, and age groups. Before considering the various
traits (e.g., emotionality, seductiveness, dramatic interpersonal style, novelty seeking,
sociability, charm, impressionability, and a tendency to somatization) to be evidence of
Histrionic Personality Disorder, it is important to evaluate whether they cause clinically
significant impairment or distress. In clinical settings, this disorder has been diagnosed
more frequently in females; however, the sex ratio is not significantly different than the
sex ratio of females within the respective clinical setting. In contrast, some studies using
structured assessments report similar prevalence rates among males and females. The
behavioral expression of Histrionic Personality Disorder may be influenced by sex role
stereotypes. For example, a man with this disorder may dress and behave in a manner
often identified as "macho" and may seek to be the center of attention by bragging about
athletic skills, whereas a woman, for example, may choose very feminine clothes and
talk about how much she impressed her dance instructor.
Prevalence
Limited data from general population studies suggest a prevalence of Histrionic
Personality Disorder of about 2%-3%. Rates of about 10%-15% have been reported in
inpatient and outpatient mental health settings when structured assessment is used.301.50 Histrionic Personality Disorder
657
Differential Diagnosis
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Histrionic Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Histrionic Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although
Borderline Personality Disorder can also be characterized by attention seeking,
manipulative behavior, and rapidly shifting emotions, it is distinguished by self-destruc-
tiveness, angry disruptions in close relationships, and chronic feelings of deep emptiness
and identity disturbance. Individuals with Antisocial Personality Disorder and
Histrionic Personality Disorder share a tendency to be impulsive, superficial, excitement
seeking, reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons with Histrionic Personality
Disorder tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions and do not characteristically
engage in antisocial behaviors. Individuals with Histrionic Personality Disorder are
manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with Antisocial Personality Disorder are
manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification. Although
individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder also crave attention from others,
they usually want praise for their "superiority," whereas the individual with Histrionic
Personality Disorder is willing to be viewed as fragile or dependent if this is instrumenta
in getting attention. Individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder may exaggerate
the intimacy of their relationships with other people, but they are more apt to emphasize
the "VIP" status or wealth of their friends. In Dependent Personality Disorder, the
person is excessively dependent on others for praise and guidance, but is without the
flamboyant, exaggerated, emotional features of Histrionic Personality Disorder.
Histrionic Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change
Due to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct
effects of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Many individuals may display histrionic personality traits. Only when these traits
are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment
or subjective distress do they constitute Histrionic Personality Disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.50 Histrionic Personality
Disorder
A pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seeking,
beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as
indicated by five (or more) of the following:
(1) is uncomfortable in situations in which he or she is not the center
of attention
(2) interaction with others is often characterized by inappropriate
sexually seductive or provocative behavior
(continued)658
Personality Disorders
D Diagnostic criteria for 301.50 Histrionic Personality
Disorder (continued]
(3) displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of emotions
(4) consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self
(5) has a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking
in detail
(6) shows self-dramatization, theatricality, and exaggerated expression
of emotion
(7) is suggestible, i.e., easily influenced by others or circumstances
(8) considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are
301.81 Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Narcissistic Personality Disorder is a pervasive pattern of
grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy that begins by early adulthood
and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with this disorder have a grandiose sense of self-importance (Crite-
rion 1). They routinely overestimate their abilities and inflate their accomplishments,
often appearing boastful and pretentious. They may blithely assume that others attribute
the same value to their efforts and may be surprised when the praise they expect and
feel they deserve is not forthcoming. Often implicit in the inflated judgments of their
own accomplishments is an underestimation (devaluation) of the contributions of others.
They are often preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty,
or ideal love (Criterion 2). They may ruminate about "long overdue" admiration and
privilege and compare themselves favorably with famous or privileged people.
Individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder believe that they are superior,
special, or unique and expect others to recognize them as such (Criterion 3). They may
feel that they can only be understood by, and should only associate with, other people
who are special or of high status and may attribute "unique," "perfect," or "gifted"
qualities to those with whom they associate. Individuals with this disorder believe that
their needs are special and beyond the ken of ordinary people. Their own self-esteem
is enhanced (i.e., "mirrored") by the idealized value that they assign to those with whom
they associate. They are likely to insist on having only the "top" person (doctor, lawyer,
hairdresser, instructor) or being affiliated with the "best" institutions, but may devalue
the credentials of those who disappoint them.
Individuals with this disorder generally require excessive admiration (Criterion 4).
Their self-esteem is almost invariably very fragile. They may be preoccupied with how
well they are doing and how favorably they are regarded by others. This often takes the
form of a need for constant attention and admiration. They may expect their arrival to
be greeted with great fanfare and are astonished if others do not covet their possessions.
They may constantly fish for compliments, often with great charm. A sense of entitlement
is evident in these individuals' unreasonable expectation of especially favorable treat-301.81 Narcissistic Personality Disorder
659
ment (Criterion 5). They expect to be catered to and are puzzled or furious when this
does not happen. For example, they may assume that they do not have to wait in line
and that their priorities are so important that others should defer to them, and then get
irritated when others fail to assist "in their very important work." This sense of entitlement
combined with a lack of sensitivity to the wants and needs of others may result in the
conscious or unwitting exploitation of others (Criterion 6). They expect to be given
whatever they want or feel they need, no matter what it might mean to others. For
example, these individuals may expect great dedication from others and may overwork
them without regard for the impact on their lives. They tend to form friendships or
romantic relationships only if the other person seems likely to advance their purposes
or otherwise enhance their self-esteem. They often usurp special privileges and extra
resources that they believe they deserve because they are so special.
Individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder generally have a lack of empathy
and have difficulty recognizing the desires, subjective experiences, and feelings of others
(Criterion 7). They may assume that others are totally concerned about their welfare.
They tend to discuss their own concerns in inappropriate and lengthy detail, while failing
to recognize that others also have feelings and needs. They are often contemptuous and
impatient with others who talk about their own problems and concerns. These
individuals may be oblivious to the hurt their remarks may inflict (e.g., exuberantly
telling a former lover that "I am now in the relationship of a lifetime!"; boasting of health
in front of someone who is sick). When recognized, the needs, desires, or feelings of
others are likely to be viewed disparagingly as signs of weakness or vulnerability. Those
who relate to individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder typically find an
emotional coldness and lack of reciprocal interest.
These individuals are often envious of others or believe that others are envious of
them (Criterion 8). They may begrudge others their successes or possessions, feeling
that they better deserve those achievements, admiration, or privileges. They may harshly
devalue the contributions of others, particularly when those individuals have received
acknowledgment or praise for their accomplishments. Arrogant, haughty behaviors
characterize these individuals. They often display snobbish, disdainful, or patronizing
attitudes (Criterion 9)- For example, an individual with this disorder may complain about
a clumsy waiter's "rudeness" or "stupidity" or conclude a medical evaluation with a
condescending evaluation of the physician.
Associated Features and Disorders
Vulnerability in self-esteem makes individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder very
sensitive to "injury" from criticism or defeat. Although they may not show it outwardly,
criticism may haunt these individuals and may leave them feeling humiliated, degraded,
hollow, and empty. They may react with disdain, rage, or defiant counterattack. Such
experiences often lead to social withdrawal or an appearance of humility that may mask
and protect the grandiosity. Interpersonal relations are typically impaired due to
problems derived from entitlement, the need for admiration, and the relative disregard
for the sensitivities of others. Though overweening ambition and confidence may lead
to high achievement, performance may be disrupted due to intolerance of criticism or
defeat. Sometimes vocational functioning can be very low, reflecting an unwillingness
to take a risk in competitive or other situations in which defeat is possible. Sustained
feelings of shame or humiliation and the attendant self-criticism may be associated with660
Personality Disorders
social withdrawal, depressed mood, and Dysthymic or Major Depressive Disorder. In
contrast, sustained periods of grandiosity may be associated with a hypomanic mood.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder is also associated with Anorexia Nervosa and Substance-
Related Disorders (especially related to cocaine). Histrionic, Borderline, Antisocial, and
Paranoid Personality Disorders may be associated with Narcissistic Personality Disorder.
Specific Age and Gender Features
Narcissistic traits may be particularly common in adolescents and do not necessarily
indicate that the individual will go on to have Narcissistic Personality Disorder.
Individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder may have special difficulties adjusting
to the onset of physical and occupational limitations that are inherent in the aging
process. Of those diagnosed with Narcissistic Personality Disorder, 50%-75% are male.
Prevalence
Estimates of prevalence of Narcissistic Personality Disorder range from 2% to 16% in the
clinical population and are less than 1% in the general population.
Differential
Diagnosis
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Narcissistic Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Narcissistic Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. The most
useful feature in discriminating Narcissistic Personality Disorder from Histrionic,
Antisocial, and Borderline Personality Disorders, whose interactive styles are
respectively coquettish, callous, and needy, is the grandiosity characteristic of Narcissistic
Personality Disorder. The relative stability of self-image as well as the relative lack of
self-destructiveness, impulsivity, and abandonment concerns also help distinguish
Narcissistic Personality Disorder from Borderline Personality Disorder. Excessive pride
in achievements, a relative lack of emotional display, and disdain for others' sensitivities
help distinguish Narcissistic Personality Disorder from Histrionic Personality Disorder.
Although individuals with Borderline, Histrionic, and Narcissistic Personality Disorders
may require much attention, those with Narcissistic Personality Disorder specifically need
that attention to be admiring. Individuals with Antisocial and Narcissistic Personality
Disorders will share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial, exploitative, and
unempathic. However, Narcissistic Personality Disorder does not necessarily include
characteristics of impulsivity, aggression, and deceit. In addition, individuals with
Antisocial Personality Disorder may not be as needy of the admiration and envy of others,
and persons with Narcissistic Personality Disorder usually lack the history of Conduct
Disorder in childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood. In both Narcissistic Personalit
Disorder and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder, the individual may
profess a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do things as well.
In contrast to the accompanying self-criticism of those with Obsessive-Compulsive
Personality Disorder, individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder are more likely
to believe that they have achieved perfection. Suspiciousness and social withdrawal301.81 Narcissistic Personality Disorder
661
usually distinguish those with Schizotypal or Paranoid Personality Disorder from
those with Narcissistic Personality Disorder. When these qualities are present in
individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder, they derive primarily from fears of
having imperfections or flaws revealed. Grandiosity may emerge as part of Manic or
Hypomanic Episodes, but the association with mood change or functional impairments
helps distinguish these episodes from Narcissistic Personality Disorder.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change
Due to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct
effects of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Many highly successful individuals display personality traits that might be considered
narcissistic. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause
significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute Narcissistic
Personality Disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.81 Narcissistic Personality
Disorder
A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for
admiration, and lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present
in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
(1) has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achieve-
ments and talents, expects to be recognized as superior without
commensurate achievements)
(2) is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, bril-
liance, beauty, or ideal love
(3) believes that he or she is "special" and unique and can only be
understood by, or should associate with, other special or high-
status people (or institutions)
(4) requires excessive admiration
(5) has a sense of entitlement, i.e., unreasonable expectations of
especially favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or
her expectations
(6) is interpersonally exploitative, i.e., takes advantage of others to
achieve his or her own ends
(7) lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the
feelings and needs of others
(8) is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him
or her
(9) shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes662
Personality Disorders
Cluster C Personality Disorders
301.82 Avoidant Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Avoidant Personality Disorder is a pervasive pattern of social
inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation that begins
by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with Avoidant Personality Disorder avoid work or school activities that
involve significant interpersonal contact because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or
rejection (Criterion 1). Offers of job promotions may be declined because the new
responsibilities might result in criticism from co-workers. These individuals avoid making
new friends unless they are certain they will be liked and accepted without criticism
(Criterion 2). Until they pass stringent tests proving the contrary, other people are
assumed to be critical and disapproving. Individuals with this disorder will not join in
group activities unless there are repeated and generous offers of support and nurturance.
Interpersonal intimacy is often difficult for these individuals, although they are able to
establish intimate relationships when there is assurance of uncritical acceptance. They
may act with restraint, have difficulty talking about themselves, and withhold intimate
feelings for fear of being exposed, ridiculed, or shamed (Criterion 3).
Because individuals with this disorder are preoccupied with being criticized or
rejected in social situations, they may have a markedly low threshold for detecting such
reactions (Criterion 4). If someone is even slightly disapproving or critical, they may feel
extremely hurt. They tend to be shy, quiet, inhibited, and "invisible" because of the fear
that any attention would be degrading or rejecting. They expect that no matter what
they say, others will see it as "wrong," and so they may say nothing at all. They react
strongly to subtle cues that are suggestive of mockery or derision. Despite their longing
to be active participants in social life, they fear placing their welfare in the hands of
others. Individuals with Avoidant Personality Disorder are inhibited in new interpersonal
situations because they feel inadequate and have low self-esteem (Criterion 5). Doubts
concerning social competence and personal appeal become especially manifest in
settings involving interactions with strangers. These individuals believe themselves to
be socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others (Criterion 6). They are
unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities because
these may prove embarrassing (Criterion 7). They are prone to exaggerate the potential
dangers of ordinary situations, and a restricted lifestyle may result from their need for
certainty and security. Someone with this disorder may cancel a job interview for fear
of being embarrassed by not dressing appropriately. Marginal somatic symptoms or other
problems may become the reason for avoiding new activities.
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Avoidant Personality Disorder often vigilantly appraise the movements
and expressions of those with whom they come into contact. Their fearful and tense
demeanor may elicit ridicule and derision from others, which in turn confirms their
self-doubts. They are very anxious about the possibility that they will react to criticism301.82 Avoidant Personality Disorder
663
with blushing or crying. They are described by others as being "shy," "timid," "lonely,"
and "isolated." The major problems associated with this disorder occur in social and
occupational functioning. The low self-esteem and hypersensitivity to rejection are
associated with restricted interpersonal contacts. These individuals may become rela-
tively isolated and usually do not have a large social support network that can help them
weather crises. They desire affection and acceptance and may fantasize about idealized
relationships with others. The avoidant behaviors can also adversely affect occupational
functioning because these individuals try to avoid the types of social situations that may
be important for meeting the basic demands of the job or for advancement.
Other disorders that are commonly diagnosed with Avoidant Personality Disorder
include Mood and Anxiety Disorders (especially Social Phobia of the Generalized Type).
Avoidant Personality Disorder is often diagnosed with Dependent Personality Disorder,
because individuals with Avoidant Personality Disorder become very attached to and
dependent on those few other people with whom they are friends. Avoidant Personality
Disorder also tends to be diagnosed with Borderline Personality Disorder and with the
Cluster A Personality Disorders (i.e., Paranoid, Schizoid, or Schizotypal Personality
Disorders).
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
There may be variation in the degree to which different cultural and ethnic groups regard
diffidence and avoidance as appropriate. Moreover, avoidant behavior may be the result
of problems in acculturation following immigration. This diagnosis should be used with
great caution in children and adolescents for whom shy and avoidant behavior may be
developmentally appropriate. Avoidant Personality Disorder appears to be equally
frequent in males and females.
Prevalence
The prevalence of Avoidant Personality Disorder in the general population is between
0.5% and 1.0%. Avoidant Personality Disorder has been reported to be present in about
10% of outpatients seen in mental health clinics.
Course
The avoidant behavior often starts in infancy or childhood with shyness, isolation, and
fear of strangers and new situations. Although shyness in childhood is a common
precursor of Avoidant Personality Disorder, in most individuals it tends to gradually
dissipate as they get older. In contrast, individuals who go on to develop Avoidant
Personality Disorder may become increasingly shy and avoidant during adolescence and
early adulthood, when social relationships with new people become especially impor-
tant. There is some evidence that in adults Avoidant Personality Disorder tends to become
less evident or to remit with age.
Differential
Diagnosis
There appears to be a great deal of overlap between Avoidant Personality Disorder and
Social Phobia, Generalized Type, so much so that they may be alternative conceptu-664
Personality Disorders
alizations of the same or similar conditions. Avoidance also characterizes both Avoidant
Personality Disorder and Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia, and they often co-occur.
The avoidance in Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia typically starts after the onset of
Panic Attacks and may vary based on their frequency and intensity. In contrast, the
avoidance in Avoidant Personality Disorder tends to have an early onset, an absence of
clear precipitants, and a stable course.
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Avoidant Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Avoidant Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Both
Avoidant Personality Disorder and Dependent Personality Disorder are characterized
by feelings of inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance.
Although the primary focus of concern in Avoidant Personality Disorder is avoidance of
humiliation and rejection, in Dependent Personality Disorder the focus is on being taken
care of. However, Avoidant Personality Disorder and Dependent Personality Disorder
are particularly likely to co-occur. Like Avoidant Personality Disorder, Schizoid Per-
sonality Disorder and Schizotypal Personality Disorder are characterized by social
isolation. However, individuals with Avoidant Personality Disorder want to have
relationships with others and feel their loneliness deeply, whereas those with Schizoid
or Schizotypal Personality Disorder may be content with and even prefer their social
isolation. Paranoid Personality Disorder and Avoidant Personality Disorder are both
characterized by a reluctance to confide in others. However, in Avoidant Personality
Disorder, this reluctance is due more to a fear of being embarrassed or being found
inadequate than to a fear of others' malicious intent.
Avoidant Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change Due
to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct effects
of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Many individuals display avoidant personality traits. Only when these traits are
inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or
subjective distress do they constitute Avoidant Personality Disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.82 Avoidant Personality
Disorder
A pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and
hypersensitivity to negative evaluation, beginning by early adulthood and
present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the
following:
(1) avoids occupational activities that involve significant interpersonal
contact, because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection
(continued)301.6 Dependent Personality Disorder
665
D Diagnostic criteria for 301.82 Avoidant Personality
Disorder (continued)
(2) is unwilling to get involved with people unless certain of being
liked
(3) shows restraint within intimate relationships because of the fear of
being shamed or ridiculed
(4) is preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in social situations
(5) is inhibited in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of
inadequacy
(6) views self as socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to
others
(7) is unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any
new activities because they may prove embarrassing
301.6 Dependent Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Dependent Personality Disorder is a pervasive and excessive
need to be taken care of that leads to submissive and clinging behavior and fears of
separation. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
The dependent and submissive behaviors are designed to elicit caregiving and arise from
a self-perception of being unable to function adequately without the help of others.
Individuals with Dependent Personality Disorder have great difficulty making
everyday decisions (e.g., what color shirt to wear to work or whether to carry an
umbrella) without an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others (Criterion
1). These individuals tend to be passive and to allow other people (often a single other
person) to take the initiative and assume responsibility for most major areas of their lives
(Criterion 2). Adults with this disorder typically depend on a parent or spouse to decide
where they should live, what kind of job they should have, and which neighbors to
befriend. Adolescents with this disorder may allow their parent(s) to decide what they
should wear, with whom they should associate, how they should spend their free time,
and what school or college they should attend. This need for others to assume
responsibility goes beyond age-appropriate and situation-appropriate requests for
assistance from others (e.g., the specific needs of children, elderly persons, and
handicapped persons). Dependent Personality Disorder may occur in an individual who
has a serious general medical condition or disability, but in such cases the difficulty in
taking responsibility must go beyond what would normally be associated with that
condition or disability.
Because they fear losing support or approval, individuals with Dependent Person-
ality Disorder often have difficulty expressing disagreement with other people, especially
those on whom they are dependent (Criterion 3). These individuals feel so unable to
function alone that they will agree with things that they feel are wrong rather than risk
losing the help of those to whom they look for guidance. They do not get appropriately666
Personality Disorders
angry at others whose support and nurturance they need for fear of alienating them. If
the individual's concerns regarding the consequences of expressing disagreement are
realistic (e.g., realistic fears of retribution from an abusive spouse), the behavior should
not be considered to be evidence of Dependent Personality Disorder.
Individuals with this disorder have difficulty initiating projects or doing things
independently (Criterion 4). They lack self-confidence and believe that they need help
to begin and carry through tasks. They will wait for others to start things because they
believe that as a rule others can do them better. These individuals are convinced that
they are incapable of functioning independently and present themselves as inept and
requiring constant assistance. They are, however, likely to function adequately if given
the assurance that someone else is supervising and approving. There may be a fear of
becoming or appearing to be more competent, because they may believe that this will
lead to abandonment. Because they rely on others to handle their problems, they often
do not learn the skills of independent living, thus perpetuating dependency.
Individuals with Dependent Personality Disorder may go to excessive lengths to
obtain nurturance and support from others, even to the point of volunteering for
unpleasant tasks if such behavior will bring the care they need (Criterion 5). They are
willing to submit to what others want, even if the demands are unreasonable. Their need
to maintain an important bond will often result in imbalanced or distorted relationships.
They may make extraordinary self-sacrifices or tolerate verbal, physical, or sexual abuse.
(It should be noted that this behavior should be considered evidence of Dependent
Personality Disorder only when it can clearly be established that other options are
available to the individual). Individuals with this disorder feel uncomfortable or helpless
when alone, because of their exaggerated fears of being unable to care for themselves
(Criterion 6). They will "tag along" with important others just to avoid being alone, even
if they are not interested or involved in what is happening.
When a close relationship ends (e.g., a breakup with a lover; the death of a
caregiver), individuals with Dependent Personality Disorder may urgently seek another
relationship to provide the care and support they need (Criterion 7). Their belief that
they are unable to function in the absence of a close relationship motivates these
individuals to become quickly and indiscriminately attached to another person. Individ-
uals with this disorder are often preoccupied with fears of being left to care for themselves
(Criterion 8). They see themselves as so totally dependent on the advice and help of an
important other person that they worry about being abandoned by that person when
there are no grounds to justify such fears. To be considered as evidence of this criterion,
the fears must be excessive and unrealistic. For example, an elderly man with cancer
who moves into his son's household for care is exhibiting dependent behavior that is
appropriate given this person's life circumstances.
Associated Features and Disorders
Individuals with Dependent Personality Disorder are often characterized by pessimism
and self-doubt, tend to belittle their abilities and assets, and may constantly refer to
themselves as "stupid." They take criticism and disapproval as proof of their worthless-
ness and lose faith in themselves. They may seek overprotection and dominance from
others. Occupational functioning may be impaired if independent initiative is required.
They may avoid positions of responsibility and become anxious when faced with
decisions. Social relations tend to be limited to those few people on whom the individual301.6 Dependent Personality Disorder
667
is dependent. There may be an increased risk of Mood Disorders, Anxiety Disorders,
and Adjustment Disorder. Dependent Personality Disorder often co-occurs with other
Personality Disorders, especially Borderline, Avoidant, and Histrionic Personality Disor-
ders. Chronic physical illness or Separation Anxiety Disorder in childhood or adolescence
may predispose the individual to the development of this disorder.
Specific Culture, Age, and Gender Features
The degree to which dependent behaviors are considered to be appropriate varies
substantially across different age and sociocultural groups. Age and cultural factors need
to be considered in evaluating the diagnostic threshold of each criterion. Dependent
behavior should be considered characteristic of the disorder only when it is clearly in
excess of the individual's cultural norms or reflects unrealistic concerns. An emphasis
on passivity, politeness, and deferential treatment is characteristic of some societies and
may be misinterpreted as traits of Dependent Personality Disorder. Similarly, societies
may differentially foster and discourage dependent behavior in males and females. This
diagnosis should be used with great caution, if at all, in children and adolescents, for
whom dependent behavior may be developmentally appropriate. In clinical settings,
this disorder has been diagnosed more frequently in females; however, the sex ratio of
this disorder is not significantly different than the sex ratio of females within the
respective clinical setting. Moreover, some studies using structured assessments report
similar prevalence rates among males and females.
Prevalence
Dependent Personality Disorder is among the most frequently reported Personality
Disorders encountered in mental health clinics.
Differential
Diagnosis
Dependent Personality Disorder must be distinguished from dependency arising as a
consequence of Axis I disorders (e.g., Mood Disorders, Panic Disorder, and Agora-
phobia) and as a result of general medical conditions. Dependent Personality
Disorder has an early onset, chronic course, and a pattern of behavior that does not
occur exclusively during an Axis I or Axis III disorder.
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Dependent Personality Disorder
because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish
among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features. However, if
an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more Personality
Disorders in addition to Dependent Personality Disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although
many Personality Disorders are characterized by dependent features, Dependent Per-
sonality Disorder can be distinguished by its predominantly submissive, reactive, and
clinging behavior. Both Dependent Personality Disorder and Borderline Personality
Disorder are characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the individual with
Borderline Personality Disorder reacts to abandonment with feelings of emotional
emptiness, rage, and demands, whereas the individual with Dependent Personality
Disorder reacts with increasing appeasement and submissiveness and urgently seeks a
replacement relationship to provide caregiving and support. Borderline Personality668
Personality Disorders
Disorder can further be distinguished from Dependent Personality Disorder by a typical
pattern of unstable and intense relationships. Individuals with Histrionic Personality
Disorder, like those with Dependent Personality Disorder, have a strong need for
reassurance and approval and may appear childlike and clinging. However, unlike
Dependent Personality Disorder, which is characterized by self-effacing and docile
behavior, Histrionic Personality Disorder is characterized by gregarious flamboyance
with active demands for attention. Both Dependent Personality Disorder and Avoidant
Personality Disorder are characterized by feelings of inadequacy, hypersensitivity to
criticism, and a need for reassurance; however, individuals with Avoidant Personality
Disorder have such a strong fear of humiliation and rejection that they withdraw until
they are certain they will be accepted. In contrast, individuals with Dependent Personality
Disorder have a pattern of seeking and maintaining connections to important others,
rather than avoiding and withdrawing from relationships.
Dependent Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality Change
Due to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the direct
effects of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also be
distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Many individuals display dependent personality traits. Only when these traits are
inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or
subjective distress do they constitute Dependent Personality Disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.6 Dependent Personality
Disorder
A pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to submissive
and clinging behavior and fears of separation, beginning by early adulthood
and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the
following:
(1) has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive
amount of advice and reassurance from others
(2) needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of his
or her life
(3) has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear
of loss of support or approval. Note: Do not include realistic fears
of retribution.
(4) has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on his or her own
(because of a lack of self-confidence in judgment or abilities rather
than a lack of motivation or energy)
(5) goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from
others, to the point of volunteering to do things that are unpleasant
(6) feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exagger-
ated fears of being unable to care for himself or herself
(continued)301.4 Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
669
D Diagnostic criteria for 301.6 Dependent Personality
Disorder (continued)
(7) urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and support
when a close relationship ends
(8) is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take care
of himself or herself
301.4 Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder is a preoccupation
with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of
flexibility, openness, and efficiency. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present
in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder attempt to maintain a
sense of control through painstaking attention to rules, trivial details, procedures, lists,
schedules, or form to the extent that the major point of the activity is lost (Criterion 1).
They are excessively careful and prone to repetition, paying extraordinary attention to
detail and repeatedly checking for possible mistakes. They are oblivious to the fact that
other people tend to become very annoyed at the delays and inconveniences that result
from this behavior. For example, when such individuals misplace a list of things to be
done, they will spend an inordinate amount of time looking for the list rather than
spending a few moments re-creating it from memory and proceeding to accomplish the
tasks. Time is poorly allocated, the most important tasks being left to the last moment.
The perfectionism and self-imposed high standards of performance cause significant
dysfunction and distress in these individuals. They may become so involved in making
every detail of a project absolutely perfect that the project is never finished (Criterion 2).
For example, the completion of a written report is delayed by numerous time-consuming
rewrites that all come up short of "perfection." Deadlines are missed, and aspects of the
individual's life that are not the current focus of activity may fall into disarray.
Individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder display excessive
devotion to work and productivity to the exclusion of leisure activities and friendships
(Criterion 3). This behavior is not accounted for by economic necessity. They often feel
that they do not have time to take an evening or a weekend day off to go on an outing
or to just relax. They may keep postponing a pleasurable activity, such as a vacation,
so that it may never occur. When they do take time for leisure activities or vacations,
they are very uncomfortable unless they have taken along something to work on so they
do not "waste time." There may be a great concentration on household chores (e.g.,
repeated excessive cleaning so that "one could eat off the floor"). If they spend time
with friends, it is likely to be in some kind of formally organized activity (e.g., sports).
Hobbies or recreational activities are approached as serious tasks requiring careful
organization and hard work to master. The emphasis is on perfect performance. These
individuals turn play into a structured task (e.g., correcting an infant for not putting rings670
Personality Disorders
on the post in the right order; telling a toddler to ride his or her tricycle in a straight
line; turning a baseball game into a harsh "lesson").
Individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder may be excessively
conscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or values
(Criterion 4). They may force themselves and others to follow rigid moral principles and
very strict standards of performance. They may also be mercilessly self-critical about
their own mistakes. Individuals with this disorder are rigidly deferential to authority and
rules and insist on quite literal compliance, with no rule bending for extenuating
circumstances. For example, the individual will not lend a quarter to a friend who needs
one to make a telephone call, because "neither a borrower or lender be" or because it
would be "bad" for the person's character. These qualities should not be accounted for
by the individual's cultural or religious identification.
Individuals with this disorder may be unable to discard worn-out or worthless
objects, even when they have no sentimental value (Criterion 5). Often these individuals
will admit to being "pack rats." They regard discarding objects as wasteful because "you
never know when you might need something" and will become upset if someone tries
to get rid of the things they have saved. Their spouses or roommates may complain
about the amount of space taken up by old parts, magazines, broken appliances, and
so on.
Individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder are reluctant to dele-
gate tasks or to work with others (Criterion 6). They stubbornly and unreasonably insist
that everything be done their way and that people conform to their way of doing things.
They often give very detailed instructions about how things should be done (e.g., there
is one and only one way to mow the lawn, wash the dishes, build a doghouse) and are
surprised and irritated if others suggest creative alternatives. At other times they may
reject offers of help even when behind schedule because they believe no one else can
do it right.
Individuals with this disorder may be miserly and stingy and maintain a standard of
living far below what they can afford, believing that spending must be tightly controlled
to provide for future catastrophes (Criterion 7). Individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive
Personality Disorder are characterized by rigidity and stubbornness (Criterion 8). They
are so concerned about having things done the one "correct" way that they have trouble
going along with anyone else's ideas. These individuals plan ahead in meticulous detail
and are unwilling to consider changes. Totally wrapped up in their own perspective,
they have difficulty acknowledging the viewpoints of others. Friends and colleagues
may become frustrated by this constant rigidity. Even when individuals with Obsessive-
Compulsive Personality Disorder recognize that it may be in their interest to compromise,
they may stubbornly refuse to do so, arguing that it is "the principle of the thing."
Associated Features and Disorders
When rules and established procedures do not dictate the correct answer, decision
making may become a time-consuming, often painful process. Individuals with Obses-
sive-Compulsive Personality Disorder may have such difficulty deciding which tasks take
priority or what is the best way of doing some particular task that they may never get
started on anything. They are prone to become upset or angry in situations in which
they are not able to maintain control of their physical or interpersonal environment,
although the anger is typically not expressed directly. For example, a person may be301.4 Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
671
angry when service in a restaurant is poor, but instead of complaining to the
management, the individual ruminates about how much to leave as a tip. On other
occasions, anger may be expressed with righteous indignation over a seemingly minor
matter. People with this disorder may be especially attentive to their relative status in
dominance-submission relationships and may display excessive deference to an author-
ity they respect and excessive resistance to authority that they do not respect.
Individuals with this disorder usually express affection in a highly controlled or
stilted fashion and may be very uncomfortable in the presence of others who are
emotionally expressive. Their everyday relationships have a formal and serious quality,
and they may be stiff in situations in which others would smile and be happy (e.g.,
greeting a lover at the airport). They carefully hold themselves back until they are sure
that whatever they say will be perfect. They may be preoccupied with logic and intellect,
and intolerant of affective behavior in others. They often have difficulty expressing tender
feelings, rarely paying compliments. Individuals with this disorder may experience
occupational difficulties and distress, particularly when confronted with new situations
that demand flexibility and compromise.
Although some studies suggest an association with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
(included in the "Anxiety Disorders" section, p. 417), it appears that the majority of
individuals with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder do not have a pattern of behavior that
meets criteria for Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder. Many of the features of
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder overlap with "type A" personality character-
istics (e.g., hostility, competitiveness, and time urgency), and these features may be
present in people at risk for myocardial infarction. There may be an association between
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder and Mood and Anxiety Disorders.
Specific Culture and Gender Features
In assessing an individual for Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder, the clinician
should not include those behaviors that reflect habits, customs, or interpersonal styles
that are culturally sanctioned by the individual's reference group. Certain cultures place
substantial emphasis on work and productivity; the resulting behaviors in members of
those societies need not be considered indications of Obsessive-Compulsive Personality
Disorder. In systematic studies, the disorder appears to be diagnosed about twice as
often among males.
Prevalence
Studies that have used systematic assessment suggest prevalence estimates of Obses-
sive-Compulsive Personality Disorder of about 1% in community samples and about
3%-10% in individuals presenting to mental health clinics.
Differential
Diagnosis
Despite the similarity in names, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is usually easily
distinguished from Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder by the presence of true
obsessions and compulsions. A diagnosis of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder should be
considered especially when hoarding is extreme (e.g., accumulated stacks of worthless
objects present a fire hazard and make it difficult for others to walk through the house).672
Personality Disorders
When criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses should be recorded.
Other Personality Disorders may be confused with Obsessive-Compulsive Person-
ality Disorder because they have certain features in common. It is, therefore, important
to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic features.
However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or more
Personality Disorders in addition to Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder, all can
be diagnosed. Individuals with Narcissistic Personality Disorder may also profess a
commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do things as well, but these
individuals are more likely to believe that they have achieved perfection, whereas those
with Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder are usually self-critical. Individuals with
Narcissistic or Antisocial Personality Disorder lack generosity but will indulge
themselves, whereas those with Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder adopt a
miserly spending style toward both self and others. Both Schizoid Personality
Disorder and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder may be characterized by an
apparent formality and social detachment. In Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disor-
der, this stems from discomfort with emotions and excessive devotion to work, whereas
in Schizoid Personality Disorder there is a fundamental lack of capacity for intimacy.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder must be distinguished from Personality
Change Due to a General Medical Condition, in which the traits emerge due to the
direct effects of a general medical condition on the central nervous system. It must also
be distinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with chronic
substance use (e.g., Cocaine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
Obsessive-compulsive personality traits in moderation may be especially adaptive,
particularly in situations that reward high performance. Only when these traits are
inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or
subjective distress do they constitute Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder.
Diagnostic criteria for 301.4 Obsessive-Compulsive
Personality Disorder
A pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and
mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, openness,
and efficiency, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of
contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
(1) is preoccupied with details, rules, lists, order, organization, or
schedules to the extent that the major point of the activity is lost
(2) shows perfectionism that interferes with task completion (e.g., is
unable to complete a project because his or her own overly strict
standards are not met)
(3) is excessively devoted to work and productivity to the exclusion
of leisure activities and friendships (not accounted for by obvious
economic necessity)
(4) is overconscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of
morality, ethics, or values (not accounted for by cultural or religious
identification)
(continued)A personality disorder not otherwise specified 673
1.9
D Diagnostic criteria for 301.4 Obsessive-Compulsive
Personality Disorder (continued)
(5) is unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects even when they
have no sentimental value
(6) is reluctant to delegate tasks or to work with others unless they
submit to exactly his or her way of doing things
(7) adopts a miserly spending style toward both self and others; money
is viewed as something to be hoarded for future catastrophes
(8) shows rigidity and stubbornness
301.9 Personality Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for disorders of personality functioning that do not meet criteria for any
specific Personality Disorder. An example is the presence of features of more than one
specific Personality Disorder that do not meet the full criteria for any one Personality
Disorder ("mixed personality"), but that together cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in one or more important areas of functioning (e.g., social or occupational).
This category can also be used when the clinician judges that a specific Personality
Disorder that is not included in the Classification is appropriate. Examples include
depressive personality disorder and passive-aggressive personality disorder (see p. 732
and p. 733, respectively, for suggested research criteria).This page intentionally left blankOther Conditions
That May Be a Focus of
Clinical Attention
A attention.These are related to the mental disorders described previously in this
manual in one of the following ways: 1) the problem is the focus of diagnosis or treatment
and the individual has no mental disorder (e.g., a Partner Relational Problem in which
neither partner has symptoms that meet criteria for a mental disorder, in which case only
the Partner Relational Problem is coded); 2) the individual has a mental disorder but it
is unrelated to the problem (e.g., a Partner Relational Problem in which one of the
partners has an incidental Specific Phobia, in which case both can be coded); 3) the
individual has a mental disorder that is related to the problem, but the problem is
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention (e.g., a Partner Relational
Problem sufficiently problematic to be a focus of treatment that is also associated with
Major Depressive Disorder in one of the partners, in which case both can be coded).
The conditions and problems in this section are coded on Axis I.
Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition
316 Psychological Factor Affecting Medical Condition
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition is the presence
of one or more specific psychological or behavioral factors that adversely affect a general
medical condition. There are several different ways in which these factors can adversely
affect the general medical condition. The factors can influence the course of the general
medical condition (which can be inferred by a close temporal association between the
factors and the development or exacerbation of, or delayed recovery from, the medical
condition). The factors may interfere with treatment of the general medical condition.
675676
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
The factors may constitute an additional health risk for the individual (e.g., continued
overeating in an individual with weight-related diabetes). They may precipitate or
exacerbate symptoms of a general medical condition by eliciting stress-related physio-
logical responses (e.g., causing chest pain in individuals with coronary artery disease,
or bronchospasm in individuals with asthma).
The psychological or behavioral factors that influence general medical conditions
include Axis I disorders, Axis II disorders, psychological symptoms or personality traits
that do not meet the full criteria for a specific mental disorder, maladaptive health
behaviors, or physiological responses to environmental or social stressors.
Psychological or behavioral factors play a potential role in the presentation or
treatment of almost every general medical condition. This category should be reserved
for those situations in which the psychological factors have a clinically significant effect
on the course or outcome of the general medical condition or place the individual at a
significantly higher risk for an adverse outcome. There must be reasonable evidence to
suggest an association between the psychological factors and the medical condition,
although it may often not be possible to demonstrate direct causality or the mechanisms
underlying the relationship. Psychological and behavioral factors may affect the course
of almost every major category of disease, including cardiovascular conditions, dermato-
logical conditions, endocrinological conditions, gastrointestinal conditions, neoplastic
conditions, neurological conditions, pulmonary conditions, renal conditions, and
rheumatological conditions.
The Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition diagnosis is coded on Axis
I, and the accompanying general medical condition is coded on Axis III. (See Appendix
G for a list of diagnostic codes for general medical conditions.) To provide greater
specificity regarding the type of psychological factor, the name is chosen from the list
below. When more than one type of factor is present, the most prominent should be
specified.
Mental Disorder Affecting . . . [Indicate the General Medical Condition].
A
specific Axis I or Axis II disorder significantly affects the course or treatment of a general
medical condition (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder adversely affecting the prognosis of
myocardial infarction, renal failure, or hemodialysis; Schizophrenia complicating the
treatment of diabetes mellitus). In addition to coding this condition on Axis I, the specific
mental disorder is also coded on Axis I or Axis II.
Psychological Symptoms Affecting . . .[Indicate the General Medical Condition].
Symptoms that do not meet full criteria for an Axis I disorder significantly affect the
course or treatment of a general medical condition (e.g., symptoms of anxiety or
depression affecting the course and severity of irritable bowel syndrome or peptic ulcer
disease, or complicating recovery from surgery).
Personality Traits or Coping Style Affecting . . . [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]. A personality trait or a maladaptive coping style significantly affects the
course or treatment of a general medical condition. Personality traits can be subthreshold
for an Axis II disorder or represent another pattern that has been demonstrated to be a
risk factor for certain illnesses (e.g., "type A," pressured, hostile behavior for coronary
artery disease). Problematic personality traits and maladaptive coping styles can impede
the working relationship with health care personnel.Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
677
Maladaptive Health Behaviors Affecting . . . [Indicate the General Medical Con-
dition]. Maladaptive health behaviors (e.g., sedentary lifestyle, unsafe sexual prac-
tices, overeating, excessive alcohol and drug use) significantly affect the course or
treatment of a general medical condition. If the maladaptive behaviors are better
accounted for by an Axis I disorder (e.g., overeating as part of Bulimia Nervosa, alcohol
use as part of Alcohol Dependence), the name "Mental Disorder Affecting Medical
Condition" should be used instead.
Stress-Related Physiological Response Affecting . . . [Indicate the General Medi-
cal Condition]. Stress-related physiological responses significantly affect the course
or treatment of a general medical condition (e.g., precipitate chest pain or arrhythmia
in a patient with coronary artery disease).
Other or Unspecified Factors Affecting . . . [Indicate the General Medical Condi-
tion]. A factor not included in the subtypes specified above or an unspecified
psychological or behavioral factor significantly affects the course or treatment of a
general medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
A temporal association between symptoms of a mental disorder and a general medical
condition is also characteristic of a Mental Disorder Due to a General Medical
Condition, but the presumed causality is in the opposite direction. In a Mental Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition, the general medical condition is judged to be
causing the mental disorder through a direct physiological mechanism. In Psychological
Factors Affecting Medical Condition, the psychological or behavioral factors are judged
to affect the course of the general medical condition.
Substance Use Disorders (e.g., Alcohol Dependence, Nicotine Dependence)
adversely affect the prognosis of many general medical conditions. If an individual has
a coexisting Substance Use Disorder that adversely affects or causes a general medical
condition, Mental Disorder Affecting General Medical Condition can be coded on Axis
I in addition to the Substance Use Disorder. For substance use patterns affecting a general
medical condition that do not meet the criteria for a Substance Use Disorder, Maladaptive
Health Behaviors Affecting Medical Condition can be specified.
Somatoform Disorders are characterized by the presence of both psychological
factors and physical symptoms, but there is no general medical condition that can
completely account for the physical symptoms. In contrast, in Psychological Factors
Affecting Medical Condition, the psychological factors adversely affect a diagnosable
general medical condition. Psychological factors affecting pain syndromes are not
diagnosed as Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition but rather as Pain
Disorder Associated With Psychological Factors or Pain Disorder Associated With
Both Psychological Factors and a General Medical Condition.
When noncompliance with treatment for a general medical condition results from
psychological factors but becomes the major focus of clinical attention, Noncompliance
With Treatment (see p. 683) should be coded.678
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
I 316 ... [Specified Psychological Factor] Affecting . . .
(Indicate the General Medical Condition]
A. A general medical condition (coded on Axis III) is present.
B. Psychological factors adversely affect the general medical condition in
one of the following ways:
(1) the factors have influenced the course of the general medical
condition as shown by a close temporal association between the
psychological factors and the development or exacerbation of, or
delayed recovery from, the general medical condition
(2) the factors interfere with the treatment of the general medical
condition
(3) the factors constitute additional health risks for the individual
(4) stress-related physiological responses precipitate or exacerbate
symptoms of the general medical condition
Choose name based on the nature of the psychological factors (if more than
one factor is present, indicate the most prominent):
Mental Disorder Affecting . . . [Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (e.g., an Axis I disorder such as Major Depressive Disorder
delaying recovery from a myocardial infarction)
Psychological Symptoms Affecting . . . [Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (e.g., depressive symptoms delaying recovery from surgery;
anxiety exacerbating asthma)
Personality Traits or Coping Style Affecting . . . [Indicate the General
Medical Condition] (e.g., pathological denial of the need for surgery in
a patient with cancer; hostile, pressured behavior contributing to
cardiovascular disease)
Maladaptive Health Behaviors Affecting . . . [Indicate the General
Medical Condition] (e.g., overeating; lack of exercise; unsafe sex)
Stress-Related Physiological Response Affecting . . . [Indicate the
General Medical Condition] (e.g., stress-related exacerbations of ulcer,
hypertension, arrhythmia, or tension headache)
Other or Unspecified Psychological Factors Affecting . . . [Indicate
the General Medical Condition] (e.g., interpersonal, cultural, or
religious factors)
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
The following Medication-Induced Movement Disorders are included because of their
frequent importance in 1) the management by medication of mental disorders or general
medical conditions; and 2) the differential diagnosis with Axis I disorders (e.g., Anxiety
Disorder versus Neuroleptic-Induced Akathisia; catatonia versus Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome). Although these disorders are labeled "medication induced," it is oftenOther Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
679
difficult to establish the causal relationship between medication exposure and the
development of the movement disorder, especially because some of these movement
disorders also occur in the absence of medication exposure. The term neuroleptic is
used broadly in this manual to refer to medications with dopamine-antagonist properties.
These include so-called "typical" antipsychotic agents (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol,
fluphenazine), "atypical" antipsychotic agents (e.g., clozapine), certain dopamine recep-
tor blocking drugs used in the treatment of symptoms such as nausea and gastroparesis
(e.g., prochlorperazine, promethazine, trimethobenzamide, thiethylperazine, and
metoclopramide), and amoxapine, which is marketed as an antidepressant. Medication-
Induced Movement Disorders should be coded on Axis I.
332.1 Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism
Parkinsonian tremor, muscular rigidity, or akinesia developing within a few weeks of
starting or raising the dose of a neuroleptic medication (or after reducing a medication
used to treat extrapyramidal symptoms). (See p. 736 for suggested research criteria.)
333.92 Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Severe muscle rigidity, elevated temperature, and other related findings (e.g., diaphore-
sis, dysphagia, incontinence, changes in level of consciousness ranging from confusion
to coma, mutism, elevated or labile blood pressure, elevated creatine phosphokinase
[CPK]) developing in association with the use of neuroleptic medication. (See p. 739 for
suggested research criteria.)
333.7 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia
Abnormal positioning or spasm of the muscles of the head, neck, limbs, or trunk
developing within a few days of starting or raising the dose of a neuroleptic medication
(or after reducing a medication used to treat extrapyramidal symptoms). (See p. 742 for
suggested research criteria.)
333.99 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia
Subjective complaints of restlessness accompanied by observed movements (e.g., fidgety
movements of the legs, rocking from foot to foot, pacing, or inability to sit or stand still)
developing within a few weeks of starting or raising the dose of a neuroleptic medication
(or after reducing a medication used to treat extrapyramidal symptoms). (See p. 744 for
suggested research criteria.)
333.82 Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia
Involuntary choreiform, athetoid, or rhythmic movements (lasting at least a few weeks)
of the tongue, jaw, or extremities developing in association with the use of neuroleptic680
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
medication for at least a few months (may be for a shorter period of time in elderly
persons). (See p. 747 for suggested research criteria.)
333.1 Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
Fine tremor occurring during attempts to maintain a posture that develops in association
with the use of medication (e.g., lithium, antidepressants, valproate). (See p. 749 for
suggested research criteria.)
333.90 Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for Medication-Induced Movement Disorders not classified by any of
the specific disorders listed above. Examples include 1) parkinsonism, acute akathisia,
acute dystonia, or dyskinetic movement that is associated with a medication other than
a neuroleptic; 2) a presentation that resembles neuroleptic malignant syndrome that is
associated with a medication other than a neuroleptic; or 3) tardive dystonia.
Other Medication-Induced Disorder
995.2 Adverse Effects of Medication
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is available for optional use by clinicians to code side effects of medication
(other than movement symptoms) when these adverse effects become a main focus of
clinical attention. Examples include severe hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, and
priapism.
Relational Problems
Relational problems include patterns of interaction between or among members of a
relational unit that are associated with clinically significant impairment in functioning,
or symptoms among one or more members of the relational unit, or impairment in the
functioning of the relational unit itself. The following relational problems are included
because they are frequently a focus of clinical attention among individuals seen by health
professionals. These problems may exacerbate or complicate the management of a
mental disorder or general medical condition in one or more members of the relational
unit, may be a result of a mental disorder or a general medical condition, may be
independent of other conditions that are present, or can occur in the absence of any
other condition. When these problems are the principal focus of clinical attention, they
should be listed on Axis I. Otherwise, if they are present but not the principal focus ofOther Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
681
clinical attention, they may be listed on Axis IV. The relevant category is generally applied
to all members of a relational unit who are being treated for the problem.
V61.9 Relational Problem Related to a
Mental Disorder or General Medical Condition
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is a pattern of impaired
interaction that is associated with a mental disorder or a general medical condition in a
family member.
V61.20 Parent-Child Relational Problem
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is a pattern of
interaction between parent and child (e.g., impaired communication, overprotection,
inadequate discipline) that is associated with clinically significant impairment in individ-
ual or family functioning or the development of clinically significant symptoms in parent
or child.
V61.1 Partner Relational Problem
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is a pattern of
interaction between spouses or partners characterized by negative communication (e.g.,
criticisms), distorted communication (e.g., unrealistic expectations), or noncommunica-
tion (e.g., withdrawal) that is associated with clinically significant impairment in
individual or family functioning or the development of symptoms in one or both partners.
V61.8 Sibling Relational Problem
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is a pattern of
interaction among siblings that is associated with clinically significant impairment in
individual or family functioning or the development of symptoms in one or more of the
siblings.
V62.81 Relational Problem Not Otherwise Specified
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is on relational
problems that are not classifiable by any of the specific problems listed above (e.g.,
difficulties with co-workers).682
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Problems Related to Abuse or Neglect
This section includes categories that should be used when the focus of clinical attention
is severe mistreatment of one individual by another through physical abuse, sexual
abuse, or child neglect. These problems are included because they are frequently a focus
of clinical attention among individuals seen by health professionals. The appropriate
V code applies if the focus of attention is on the perpetrator of the abuse or neglect or
on the relational unit in which it occurs. If the individual being evaluated or treated is
the victim of the abuse or neglect, code 995.5 for a child or 995.81 for an adult.
V61.21 Physical Abuse of Child
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is physical abuse of
a child.
Coding note: Specify 995.5 if focus of clinical attention is on the victim.
V61.21 Sexual Abuse of Child
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is sexual abuse of a
child.
Coding note: Specify 995.5 if focus of clinical attention is on the victim.
V61.21 Neglect of Child
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is child neglect.
Coding note: Specify995-5 if focus of clinical attention is on the victim.
V61.1 Physical Abuse of Adult
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is physical abuse of
an adult (e.g., spouse beating, abuse of elderly parent).
Coding note: Specify995.81 if focus of clinical attention is on the victim.
V61.1 Sexual Abuse of Adult
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is sexual abuse of an
adult (e.g., sexual coercion, rape).
Coding note: Sp ecify99 5.81 if focus of clinical attention is on the victim.Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
683
Additional Conditions That May Be a
Focus of Clinical Attention
VI 5.81 Noncompliance With Treatment
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is noncompliance with
an important aspect of the treatment for a mental disorder or a general medical condition.
The reasons for noncompliance may include discomfort resulting from treatment (e.g.,
medication side effects), expense of treatment, decisions based on personal value
judgments or religious or cultural beliefs about the advantages and disadvantages of the
proposed treatment, maladaptive personality traits or coping styles (e.g., denial of
illness), or the presence of a mental disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia, Avoidant Personality
Disorder). This category should be used only when the problem is sufficiently severe
to warrant independent clinical attention.
V65.2 Malingering
The essential feature of Malingering is the intentional production of false or grossly
exaggerated physical or psychological symptoms, motivated by external incentives such
as avoiding military duty, avoiding work, obtaining financial compensation, evading
criminal prosecution, or obtaining drugs. Under some circumstances, Malingering may
represent adaptive behavior—for example, feigning illness while a captive of the enemy
during wartime.
Malingering should be strongly suspected if any combination of the following is
noted:
1. Medicolegal context of presentation (e.g., the person is referred by an attorney
to the clinician for examination)
2. Marked discrepancy between the person's claimed stress or disability and the
objective findings
3. Lack of cooperation during the diagnostic evaluation and in complying with the
prescribed treatment regimen
4. The presence of Antisocial Personality Disorder
Malingering differs from Factitious Disorder in that the motivation for the symptom
production in Malingering is an external incentive, whereas in Factitious Disorder
external incentives are absent. Evidence of an intrapsychic need to maintain the sick
role suggests Factitious Disorder. Malingering is differentiated from Conversion Disorder
and other Somatoform Disorders by the intentional production of symptoms and by the
obvious, external incentives associated with it. In Malingering (in contrast to Conversion
Disorder), symptom relief is not often obtained by suggestion or hypnosis.
V71.01 Adult Antisocial Behavior
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is adult antisocial behavior
that is not due to a mental disorder (e.g., Conduct Disorder, Antisocial Personality684
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Disorder, or an Impulse-Control Disorder). Examples include the behavior of some
professional thieves, racketeers, or dealers in illegal substances.
V71.02 Child or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is antisocial behavior in
a child or adolescent that is not due to a mental disorder (e.g., Conduct Disorder or an
Impulse-Control Disorder). Examples include isolated antisocial acts of children or
adolescents (not a pattern of antisocial behavior).
V62.89 Borderline Intellectual Functioning
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is associated with
borderline intellectual functioning, that is, an IQ in the 71-84 range. Differential diagnosis
between Borderline Intellectual Functioning and Mental Retardation (an IQ of 70 or
below) is especially difficult when the coexistence of certain mental disorders (e.g.,
Schizophrenia) is involved.
Coding note: This is coded on Axis II.
780.9 Age-Related Cognitive Decline
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is an objectively identified
decline in cognitive functioning consequent to the aging process that is within normal
limits given the person's age. Individuals with this condition may report problems
remembering names or appointments or may experience difficulty in solving complex
problems. This category should be considered only after it has been determined that the
cognitive impairment is not attributable to a specific mental disorder or neurological
condition.
V62.82
Bereavement
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is a reaction to the death
of a loved one. As part of their reaction to the loss, some grieving individuals present
with symptoms characteristic of a Major Depressive Episode (e.g., feelings of sadness
and associated symptoms such as insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss). The
bereaved individual typically regards the depressed mood as "normal," although the
person may seek professional help for relief of associated symptoms such as insomnia
or anorexia. The duration and expression of "normal" bereavement vary considerably
among different cultural groups. The diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder is generally
not given unless the symptoms are still present 2 months after the loss. However, the
presence of certain symptoms that are not characteristic of a "normal" grief reaction may
be helpful in differentiating bereavement from a Major Depressive Episode. These
include 1) guilt about things other than actions taken or not taken by the survivor at the
time of the death; 2) thoughts of death other than the survivor feeling that he or sheOther Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
685
would be better off dead or should have died with the deceased person; 3) morbid
preoccupation with worthlessness; 4) marked psychomotor retardation; 5) prolonged
and marked functional impairment; and 6) hallucinatory experiences other than thinking
that he or she hears the voice of, or transiently sees the image of, the deceased person.
V62.3 Academic Problem
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is an academic problem
that is not due to a mental disorder or, if due to a mental disorder, is sufficiently severe
to warrant independent clinical attention. An example is a pattern of failing grades or
of significant underachievement in a person with adequate intellectual capacity in the
absence of a Learning or Communication Disorder or any other mental disorder that
would account for the problem.
V62.2 Occupational Problem
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is an occupational problem
that is not due to a mental disorder or, if it is due to a mental disorder, is sufficiently
severe to warrant independent clinical attention. Examples include job dissatisfaction
and uncertainty about career choices.
313.82 Identity Problem
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is uncertainty about
multiple issues relating to identity such as long-term goals, career choice, friendship
patterns, sexual orientation and behavior, moral values, and group loyalties.
V62.89 Religious or Spiritual Problem
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is a religious or spiritual
problem. Examples include distressing experiences that involve loss or questioning of
faith, problems associated with conversion to a new faith, or questioning of spiritual
values that may not necessarily be related to an organized church or religious institution.
V62.4 Acculturation Problem
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is a problem involving
adjustment to a different culture (e.g., following migration).
V62.89 Phase of Life Problem
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is a problem associated
with a particular developmental phase or some other life circumstance that is not due686
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
to a mental disorder or, if it is due to a mental disorder, is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention. Examples include problems associated with entering
school, leaving parental control, starting a new career, and changes involved in marriage,
divorce, and retirement.Additional Codes
300.9 Unspecified Mental Disorder (nonpsychotic)
There are several circumstances in which it may be appropriate to assign this code: 1) for
a specific mental disorder not included in the DSM-IV Classification, 2) when none of
the available Not Otherwise Specified categories is appropriate, or 3) when it is judged
that a nonpsychotic mental disorder is present but there is not enough information
available to diagnose one of the categories provided in the Classification. In some cases,
the diagnosis can be changed to a specific disorder after more information is obtained.
V71.09 No Diagnosis or Condition on Axis I
When no Axis I diagnosis or condition is present, this should be indicated. There may
or may not be an Axis II diagnosis.
799.9 Diagnosis or Condition Deferred on Axis I
When there is insufficient information to make any diagnostic judgment about an Axis I
diagnosis or condition, this should be noted as Diagnosis or Condition Deferred on Axis I.
V71.09 No Diagnosis on Axis II
When no Axis II diagnosis (e.g., no Personality Disorder) is present, this should be
indicated. There may or may not be an Axis I diagnosis or condition.
799.9 Diagnosis Deferred on Axis II
When there is insufficient information to make any diagnostic judgment about an Axis
II diagnosis, this should be noted as Diagnosis Deferred on Axis II.
687This page intentionally left blankAppendix A
Decision Trees for
Differential Diagnosis
T
he purpose of these decision trees is to aid the clinician in understanding the
organization and hierarchical structure of the DSM-IV Classification. Each decision
tree starts with a set of clinical features. When one of these features is a prominent part
of the presenting clinical picture, the clinician can follow the series of questions to rule
in or rule out various disorders. Note that the questions are only approximations of the
diagnostic criteria and are not meant to replace them.
The Psychotic Disorders decision tree is the only one that contains disorders that
are mutually exclusive (i.e., only one disorder from that section can be diagnosed in a
given individual for a particular episode). For the other decision trees, it is important to
refer to the individual criteria sets to determine when more than one diagnosis may
apply.
Contents
I. Differential Diagnosis of Mental Disorders Due to a
General Medical Condition
II. Differential Diagnosis of Substance-Induced Disorders
III. Differential Diagnosis of Psychotic Disorders
IV. Differential Diagnosis of Mood Disorders
V. Differential Diagnosis of Anxiety Disorders
VI. Differential Diagnosis of Somatoform Disorders
690
692
694
696
698
700
Note: Prepared by Michael B. First, M.D., Allen Frances, M.D., and Harold Alan Pincus, M.D.
689690
Appendix A
Differential Diagnosis of Mental Disorders
Due to a General Medical Condition
Symptoms that are
due to the direct
physiological effects
of a general medical
condition
T
Disturbance of
consciousness and a
change in cognition
Yes
Evidence that the
disturbance has
more than one
etiology (e.g.,
substance and
general medical
conditions)
no
DELIRIUM DUE TO
A GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITION
yes
No
DELIRIUM DUE TO
MULTIPLE
ETIOLOGIES
Memory impairment
No
Yes At least one
additional cognitive
deficit
No
Yes
• — > Evidence that the
Yes
disturbance has
more than one
etiology (e.g.,
cerebrovascular
disease and
Alzheimer's disease)
JNo
Evidence that
cerebrovascular
disease is
etiologically related
to the disturbance
|No
Disturbance due to
central nervous
system condition or
systemic condition
known to cause
dementia
Yes
Yes
DEMENTIA DUE TO
MULTIPLE
ETIOLOGIES
VASCULAR
DEMENTIA
DEMENTIA DUE TO
A GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITION
iNo
Gradual onset and
continuing cognitive
decline
Yes
DEMENTIA OF THE
ALZHEIMER'S TYPE
No
'
DEMENTIA NOS
AMNESTIC
DISORDER DUE TO
A GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITIONDecision Trees for Differential Diagnosis
I
Prominent delusions
or hallucinations
predominate
INo
Prominent and
persistent mood
disturbance
predominates
INO
Prominent anxiety,
panic attacks,
obsessions, or
compulsions
predominate
iNo
Clinically significant
sexual dysfunction
exclusively due to a
general medical
condition
INC
Disturbance in sleep
sufficiently severe to
warrant independent
clinical attention
I No
Catalonia
INO
Change in previous
personality pattern
INO
Clinically significant
symptoms
etiologically related
to a general medical
condition that do
not meet criteria for
a specific Mental
Disorder Due to a
General Medical
Condition
No
No mental disorder
(symptoms that are
not clinically
significant)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
691
PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER DUE TO
A GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITION
MOOD DISORDER
DUE TO A
GENERAL MEDICAL
CONDITION
ANXIETY
DISORDER DUE TO
A GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITION
SEXUAL
DYSFUNCTION
DUE TO A
GENERAL MEDICAL
CONDITION
SLEEP DISORDER
DUE TO A
GENERAL MEDICAL
CONDITION
CATATONIC
DISORDER DUE TO
A GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITION
PERSONALITY
CHANGE DUE TO
A GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITION
MENTAL DISORDER
NOS DUE TO A
GENERAL MEDICAL
CONDITION692
Appendix A
Differential Diagnosis of Substance-Induced Disorders
(Not Including Dependence and Abuse)
Symptoms that are
due to the direct
physiological effects
of a substance (i.e.,
a drug of abuse, a
medication, or a
toxin)
A disturbance of
consciousness and a
change in cognition
that are in excess of
that usually seen in
intoxication or
withdrawal and that
warrant independent
clinical attention
Yes Evidence that the
disturbance has
more than one
etiology (e.g.,
substance and
general medical
condition)
No
No Onset of delirium
during withdrawal
from a substance
Yes
Yes SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED
WITHDRAWAL
DELIRIUM
No
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED
INTOXICATION
DELIRIUM
DELIRIUM DUE
TO MULTIPLE
ETIOLOGIES
Persistent memory
impairment
No
Yes
At least one
additional
cognitive deficit
No
Yes
Evidence that the
disturbance has
more than one
etiology (e.g.,
substance and
general medical
condition)
No
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED
PERSISTING
DEMENTIA
Yes
DEMENTIA DUE
TO MULTIPLE
ETIOLOGIES
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED
PERSISTING
AMNESTIC
DISORDERDecision Trees for Differential Diagnosis
Delusions or hallucinations predominate, are in
excess of that usually seen in intoxication or
withdrawal, and warrant independent clinical
attention
1 No
A mood disturbance predominates, is in excess
of that usually seen in intoxication or
withdrawal, and warrants independent clinical
attention
1 No
Anxiety, panic attacks, or obsessions or
compulsions predominate; are in excess of that
usually seen in intoxication or withdrawal; and
warrant independent clinical attention
i No
Clinically significant sexual dysfunction
exclusively clue to a substance, is in excess of
that usually seen in intoxication, and warrants
independent clinical attention
I No
Disturbance in sleep that is sufficiently severe to
warrant independent clinical attention and is in
excess of that usually seen in intoxication or
withdrawal
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED
PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER
Specify if onset
during intoxication
or withdrawal
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED MOOD
DISORDER
Specify if onset
during intoxication
or withdrawal
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED
ANXIETY
DISORDER
Specify if onset
during intoxication
or withdrawal
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED SEXUAL
DYSFUNCTION
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED SLEEP
DISORDER
Specify if onset
during intoxication
or withdrawal
I No
Development of a reversible syndrome due to
recent use of a substance
I No
Development of a syndrome due to reduction or
cessation of use of a substance
No
Clinically significant symptoms due to a
substance that do not meet criteria for one of
the Substance-Induced Disorders
,,No
No Substance-Induced Disorder
(substance-induced symptoms that are not
clinically significant)
Yes
Yes
Yes
693
SUBSTANCE
INTOXICATION
SUBSTANCE
WITHDRAWAL
SUBSTANCE-
RELATED
DISORDER NOS694
Appendix A
Differential Diagnosis of Psychotic Disorders
Delusions, hallucinations, disorganized
speech, or grossly disorganized
behavior
I
I
Due to the direct physiological effects
of a general medical condition
1 Yes
I
„ PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER
DUE TO A
GENERAL
MEDICAL
I CONDITION
[NO
Due to the direct
physiological effects
of a substance (e.g.,
a drug of abuse, a
medication, or a
toxin)
I VPS
I
SUBSTANCE-
INDUCED
PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER
I NO
Symptoms of
active phase of
Schizophrenia,
lasting at least
1 month
[
N
1 Yes I
1 No
—> Major
Depressive or
Manic Episode
concurrent with
active-phase
symptoms
o [ Y e s
I
Total duration
of mood
episodes has
been brief
relative to
duration of
active and
residual periods
IYPC
Tg I
* Duration at
least 6 months
I Yes
I
„ SCHI2O-
PHRENIA
sNo
No
SCHIZO-
PHRENIFORM
| DISORDER
I
"
I Yes
At least 2 weeks
of delusions or
hallucinations
in the absence
No
of prominent
mood symptoms
„
I
SCHIZO-
AFFECTIVE
DISORDER
MOOD
DISORDER
WITH
PSYCHOTIC
FEATURES
(see Mood
Disorders tree)Decision Trees for Differential Diagnosis
695
i
Nonbizarre
delusions
lasting at least
1 month
I Yes
I
^ Total duration
of mood
episodes has
been brief
relative to
duration of
delusional
periods
No
I Yes
I
^ Apart from
delusions,
functioning not
markedly
impaired
I Yes
I DELUSIONAL
DISORDER
NO
^No
Delusions
occur only
during mood
episodes
No
PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER NOS
Yes
MOOD
DISORDER
WITH
PSYCHOTIC
FEATURES
(see Mood
Disorders tree)
Duration more
than 1 day but
less than
1 month
I Yes
BRIEF
PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER
0 fj
PSYCHOTIC
DISORDER NOS696
Appendix A
Differential Diagnosis of Mood Disorders
Depressed, elevated,
expansive, or irritable mood
I
Due to the direct
physiological effects of a
general medical condition
No
Due to the direct
physiological effects of a
substance (i.e., a drug of
abuse, a medication, or a
toxin)
Yes
MOOD DISORDER DUE TO
A GENERAL MEDICAL
CONDITION
Yes
SUBSTANCE-INDUCED
MOOD DISORDER
| No
Determine type of present
and past mood episodes
Elevated, expansive, or
irritable mood, at least 1-week
duration; marked impairment
or hospitalization
Yes
MANIC EPISODE
No
Elevated, expansive, or
irritable mood, at least 4-day
duration; changes observable
by others but less severe
than a Manic Episode
Yes HYPOMANIC EPISODE
NoT-
At least 2 weeks of
depressed mood or loss of
interest plus associated
symptoms, and not better
accounted for by Bereavement
Yes MAJOR DEPRESSIVE
EPISODE
No 1 -
Criteria met for Manic
Episode and Major
Depressive Episode nearly
every day for at least 1 week
Yes MIXED EPISODE
Mn I *
Has ever had a MANIC
EPISODE or a MIXED
EPISODE
No
Yes
No
Psychotic symptoms occur at
times other than during Manic
or Mixed Episodes
BIPOLAR I DISORDER
res
Occurred exclusively during
Schizoaffective Disorder
(review Psychotic Disorders
tree)
yes SCHIZOAFFECTIVE
DISORDER, BIPOLAR TYPE
no
BIPOLAR DISORDER NOS
(superimposed on a Psychotic
Disorder)Decision Trees for Differential Diagnosis
Has ever had a HYPOMANIC
EPISODE and at least one
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE EPISODE
Yes
697
BIPOLAR II DISORDER
No
2+ years of hypomanic
symptoms and periods of
depressed mood
No
Clinically significant
manic/hypomanic symptoms
that do not meet criteria for a
specific Bipolar Disorder
JNo
Has ever had a MAJOR
DEPRESSIVE EPISODE
Yes
CYCLOTHYMIC DISORDER
Yes
Yes
No
BIPOLAR DISORDER NOS
Psychotic symptoms occur at
times other than during Major
Depressive Episodes
No
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE
DISORDER
I Yes
Occurred exclusively during
Schizoaffective Disorder
(review Psychotic Disorders
tree)
Yes
\
SCHIZOAFFECTIVE
DISORDER, DEPRESSIVE
TYPE
No
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER NOS
(superimposed on Psychotic
Disorder)
Depressed mood, more days
than not, for at least 2 years
with associated symptoms
No
Depressed mood not meeting
criteria for one of above
Mood Disorders that develops
in response to a stressor
No
Clinically significant
depressive symptoms that do
not meet criteria for a specific
Mood Disorder
| No
No Mood Disorder (mood
symptoms that are not
clinically significant)
Yes
Yes
Yes
DYSTHYMIC DISORDER
ADJUSTMENT DISORDER
WITH DEPRESSED MOOD
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER NOS698
Appendix A
Differential Diagnosis of Anxiety Disorders
Symptoms of anxiety, fear,
avoidance, or increased
arousal
Due to the direct
physiological effects of a
general medical condition
Yes
ANXIETY DISORDER DUE TO
A GENERAL MEDICAL
CONDITION
JNo
Due to the direct
physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of
abuse, a medication, a toxin)
Yes
SUBSTANCE-INDUCED
ANXIETY DISORDER
JNo
Recurrent unexpected Panic
Attacks plus a month of
worry, concern about attacks,
or change in behavior
Yes
No
Agoraphobia, i.e., anxiety
about being in places from
which escape might be
difficult or embarrassing in
the event of having a Panic
Attack
Yes
PANIC DISORDER WITH
AGORAPHOBIA
No
PANIC DISORDER
WITHOUT AGORAPHOBIA
Agoraphobia, i.e., anxiety
about being in places from
which escape might be
difficult or embarrassing in
the event of having panic-like
symptoms
Yes
AGORAPHOBIA WITHOUT
HISTORY OF PANIC
DISORDER
TNC
Anxiety concerning
separation from attachment
figures with onset in
childhood
Yes
SEPARATION ANXIETY
DISORDER
no
Fear of humiliation or
embarrassment in social or
performance situations
Yes
SOCIAL PHOBIA (SOCIAL
ANXIETY DISORDER)
no
Fear cued by object or
situation
Yes
SPECIFIC PHOBIA
no
Obsessions or compulsions
no
Yes
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE
DISORDERDecision Trees for Differential Diagnosis
6-month period of excessive
anxiety and worry plus
associated symptoms
Yes
No
Occurs exclusively during a
Mood or Psychotic Disorder
699
GENERALIZED ANXIETY
DISORDER
Yes
No
See Mood Disorders or
Psychotic Disorders tree
Anxiety in response to a
severe traumatic event
Yes
Reexperiencing of event,
increased arousal, and
avoidance of stimuli
associated with traumatic
event
NO
No
Yes
Yes
Duration of more than
1 month
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS
DISORDER
No
ACUTE STRESS DISORDER
Anxiety that does not meet
criteria for one of the above
Anxiety Disorders and
develops in response to
a stressor
TNC
Clinically significant
symptoms that do not meet
criteria for a specific Anxiety
Disorder
No
No Anxiety Disorder
(symptoms of fear, anxiety, or
avoidance that are not
clinically significant)
Yes
ADJUSTMENT DISORDER
WITH ANXIETY
Yes
ANXIETY DISORDER NOS700
Appendix A
Differential Diagnosis of Somatoform Disorders
Physical complaints
or irrational anxiety
about illness or
appearance
T
Physical complaints
are fully explained
by a general
medical condition
and complaints are
not in excess of
expected
Yes
Specific GENERAL
MEDICAL
CONDITION (no
Somatoform
Disorder)
Psychological
factors adversely
affect general
medical condition
Yes
PSYCHOLOGICAL
FACTORS
AFFECTING
MEDICAL
CONDITION
j No
Physical symptoms
are intentionally
produced
Yes
External incentives
are absent
yes
FACTITIOUS
DISORDER
no
No
MALINGERING
History of multiple
physical complaints
with at least 4 pain
symptoms,
2 gastrointestinal
symptoms, 1 sexual
symptom, and 1
pseudoneurological
symptom
no
Symptom or deficit
affecting voluntary
motor or sensory
function
Yes
Yes
SOMATIZATION
DISORDER
CONVERSION
DISORDER
[NO
Symptom or deficit
affecting sexual
functioning
{No
Pain is focus of
clinical attention,
and psychological
factors have
important role
No
Other physical
complaints lasting at
least 6 months
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
SEXUAL
DYSFUNCTION
PAIN DISORDER
UNDIFFERENTIATED
SOMATOFORM
DISORDERDecision Trees for Differential Diagnosis
Preoccupation with
idea of having a
serious disease
Yes Belief is of
delusional
intensity
No
701
HYPOCHONDRIASIS
I Yes
No
See Psychotic
Disorders tree
Preoccupation with
imagined defect in
appearance
Yes
BODY
DYSMORPHIC
DISORDER
(if delusional,
also see Psychotic
Disorders tree)
No
Clinically significant
somatoform
symptoms that do
not meet criteria for
a specific
Somatoform Disorder
| No
No Somatoform
Disorder
(somatoform
symptoms that are
not clinically
significant)
Yes
SOMATOFORM
DISORDER NOSThis page intentionally left blankAppendix B
Criteria Sets and Axes
Provided for Further Study
T
his appendix contains a number of proposals for new categories and axes that were
suggested for possible inclusion in DSM-IV. The DSM-IV Task Force and Work
Groups subjected each of these proposals to a careful empirical review and invited wide
commentary from the field. The Task Force determined that there was insufficient
information to warrant inclusion of these proposals as official categories or axes in
DSM-IV.
The items, thresholds, and durations contained in the research criteria sets are
intended to provide a common language for researchers and clinicians who are interested
in studying these disorders. It is hoped that such research will help to determine the
possible utility of these proposed categories and will result in refinement of the criteria
sets. The specific thresholds and durations were set by expert consensus (informed by
literature review, data reanalysis, and field-trial results when such information was
available) and, as such, should be considered tentative. It would be highly desirable for
researchers to study alternative items, thresholds, or durations whenever this is possible.
The following proposals are included in this appendix:
Postconcussional disorder
Mild neurocognitive disorder
Caffeine withdrawal
Alternative dimensional descriptors for Schizophrenia
Postpsychotic depressive disorder of Schizophrenia
Simple deteriorative disorder (simple Schizophrenia)
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Alternative Criterion B for Dysthymic Disorder
Minor depressive disorder
Recurrent brief depressive disorder
Mixed anxiety-depressive disorder
Factitious disorder by proxy
Dissociative trance disorder
Binge-eating disorder
Depressive personality disorder
703704
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Passive-aggressive personality disorder (negativistic personality disorder)
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia
Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
Medication-Induced Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
(Note: These categories are included in the "Other Conditions That May Be
a Focus of Clinical Attention" section. Text and research criteria sets for these
conditions are included here.)
Defensive Functioning Scale
Global Assessment of Relational Functioning (GARF) Scale
Social and Occupational Functioning Assessment Scale (SOFAS)
Postconcussional Disorder
Features
The essential feature is an acquired impairment in cognitive functioning, accompanied
by specific neurobehavioral symptoms, that occurs as a consequence of closed head
injury of sufficient severity to produce a significant cerebral concussion. The manifesta-
tions of concussion include loss of consciousness, posttraumatic amnesia, and less
commonly, posttraumatic onset of seizures. Specific approaches for defining this criterion
need to be refined by further research. Although there is insufficient evidence to establish
a definite threshold for the severity of the closed head injury, specific criteria have been
suggested, for example, two of the following: 1) a period of unconsciousness lasting
more than 5 minutes, 2) a period of posttraumatic amnesia that lasts more than 12 hours
after the closed head injury, or 3) a new onset of seizures (or marked worsening of a
preexisting seizure disorder) that occurs within the first 6 months after the closed head
injury. There must also be documented cognitive deficits in either attention (concentra-
tion, shifting focus of attention, performing simultaneous cognitive tasks) or memory
(learning or recalling information). Accompanying the cognitive disturbances, there must
be three (or more) symptoms that are present for at least 3 months following the closed
head injury. These include becoming fatigued easily; disordered sleep; headache; vertigo
or dizziness; irritability or aggression on little or no provocation; anxiety, depression, or
affective lability; apathy or lack of spontaneity; and other changes in personality (e.g.,
social or sexual inappropriateness). The cognitive disturbances and the somatic and
behavioral symptoms develop after the head trauma has occurred or represent a
significant worsening of preexisting symptoms. The cognitive and neurobehavioral
sequelae are accompanied by significant impairment in social or occupational function-
ing and represent a significant decline from a previous level of functioning. In the case
of school-age children, there may be significant worsening in academic achievement
dating from the trauma. This proposed disorder should not be considered if the
individual's symptoms meet the criteria for Dementia Due to Head Trauma or if the
symptoms are better accounted for by another mental disorder.Postconcussional Disorder
705
Associated Features
Additional features that may be sequelae of closed head injury include visual or hearing
impairments and anosmia (loss of sense of smell). The latter may be related to a lack of
interest in food. Specific orthopedic and neurological complications may be present,
depending on the cause, nature, and extent of the trauma. Substance-Related Disorders
are frequently associated with closed head injury. Closed head injury occurs more often
in young males and has been associated with risk-taking behaviors.
Differential
Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Cognitive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
If the head trauma results in a dementia (e.g., memory impairment and at least one
other cognitive impairment), postconcussional disorder should not be considered. Mild
neurocognitive disorder, like postconcussional disorder, is included in this appendix
(see p. 706). Postconcussional disorder can be differentiated from mild neurocognitive
disorder by the specific pattern of cognitive, somatic, and behavioral symptoms and the
presence of a specific etiology (i.e., closed head injury). Individuals with Somatization
Disorder and Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder may manifest similar behav-
ioral or somatic symptoms; however, these disorders do not have a specific etiology
(i.e., closed head injury) or measurable impairment in cognitive functioning.
Postconcussional disorder must be distinguished from Factitious Disorder (the need
to assume the sick role) and Malingering (in which the desire for compensation may
lead to the production or prolongation of symptoms due to closed head injury).
Research criteria for postconcussional disorder
A. A history of head trauma that has caused significant cerebral concussion.
Note: The manifestations of concussion include loss of consciousness, post-
traumatic amnesia, and, less commonly, posttraumatic onset of seizures. The
specific method of defining this criterion needs to be established by further
research.
B. Evidence from neuropsychological testing or quantified cognitive as-
sessment of difficulty in attention (concentrating, shifting focus of
attention, performing simultaneous cognitive tasks) or memory (learning
or recalling information).
C. Three (or more) of the following occur shortly after the trauma and last
at least 3 months:
(1) becoming fatigued easily
(2) disordered sleep
(3) headache
(continued)706
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
D Research criteria for postconcussional disorder (continued)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
vertigo or dizziness
irritability or aggression on little or no provocation
anxiety, depression, or affective lability
changes in personality (e.g., social or sexual inappropriateness)
apathy or lack of spontaneity
D. The symptoms in Criteria B and C have their onset following head
trauma or else represent a substantial worsening of preexisting symp-
toms.
E. The disturbance causes significant impairment in social or occupational
functioning and represents a significant decline from a previous level of
functioning. In school-age children, the impairment may be manifested
by a significant worsening in school or academic performance dating
from the trauma.
F. The symptoms do not meet criteria for Dementia Due to Head Trauma
and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g.,
Amnestic Disorder Due to Head Trauma, Personality Change Due to
Head Trauma).
Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Features
The essential feature is the development of impairment in neurocognitive functioning
that is due to a general medical condition. By definition, the level of cognitive impairment
and the impact on everyday functioning is mild (e.g., the individual is able to partially
compensate for cognitive impairment with additional effort). Individuals with this
condition have a new onset of deficits in at least two areas of cognitive functioning.
These may include disturbances in memory (learning or recalling new information),
executive functioning (e.g., planning, reasoning), attention or speed of information
processing (e.g., concentration, rapidity of assimilating or analyzing information),
perceptual motor abilities (e.g., integrating visual, tactile, or auditory information with
motor activities), or language (e.g., word-finding difficulties, reduced fluency). The
report of cognitive impairment must be corroborated by the results of neuropsychological
testing or bedside standardized cognitive assessment techniques. Furthermore, the
cognitive deficits cause marked distress or interfere with the individual's social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning and represent a decline from a previous
level of functioning. The cognitive disturbance does not meet criteria for a delirium, a
dementia, or an amnestic disorder and is not better accounted for by another mental
disorder (e.g., a Substance-Related Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder).Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
707
Associated Features
The associated features depend on the underlying general medical condition. In the case
of certain chronic disorders (e.g., hypoxemia, electrolyte imbalances), the cognitive
profile is usually one of a generalized reduction in all cognitive functions. Some
neurological and other general medical conditions produce patterns of cognitive
impairment that suggest more "subcortical" brain involvement (i.e., disproportionate
impairment in the ability to concentrate and learn new facts and in the speed and
efficiency of processing information). These include the early phases of Huntington's
disease, HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder, and Parkinson's disease. Other condi-
tions (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus) are more frequently associated with a
multifocal or patchy pattern of cognitive loss. The EEC may show mild slowing of
background activity or disturbance in evoked potentials. Mild cognitive impairment,
even in cases of early Alzheimer's disease, is frequently present without specific changes
on neuroanatomical studies using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed
tomography (CT). Abnormalities are more likely to be present in functional brain imaging
studies (single photon emission computer tomography [SPECT], positron-emission
tomography [PET], functional MRI). The course depends on the underlying etiology. In
some instances, the cognitive impairment slowly worsens so that ultimately a diagnosis
of dementia becomes appropriate (e.g., early phases of Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's
disease, and other slowly progressive neurodegenerative conditions). In other instances,
the disturbance may improve slowly, as in gradual recovery from hypothyroidism. In
some instances, cognitive disturbances due to severe metabolic derangements or
infectious diseases may resolve partially but be characterized by a residual impairment
that is permanent.
Differential
Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Cognitive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Although there is no clear boundary between mild neurocognitive disorder and
dementia, mild neurocognitive disorder has less cognitive impairment and less impact
on daily activities, and memory impairment is not a requirement. Mild neurocognitive
disorder may be confused with a slowly evolving delirium, especially early in its course.
Mild neurocognitive disorder can be distinguished from an amnestic disorder by the
requirement that there be cognitive impairment in at least two areas. Mild neurocognitive
disorder should not be considered if an individual's symptoms meet criteria for a
Substance-Related Disorder (including medication side effects). In such cases, the
appropriate Substance-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified should be diagnosed.
Postconcussional disorder, another category listed in this appendix (see p. 704),
is distinguished from mild neurocognitive disorder by the presence of a specific pattern
of symptoms and a specific etiology (i.e., closed head injury).
Mild neurocognitive disturbances are a common associated feature of a number of
mental disorders (e.g., Major Depressive Disorder). Mild neurocognitive disorder
should only be considered if the cognitive impairment is better accounted for by the
direct effects of a general medical condition than by a mental disorder. Individuals with
Age-Related Cognitive Decline may have similar levels of cognitive impairment, but
the decline is considered to be part of the normative aging process rather than attributable
to a general medical condition. Individuals may report subjective complaints of708
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
impairment in cognitive functioning that cannot be corroborated by neuro-
psychological testing or are judged not to be associated with a general medical condition.
This proposed disorder should not be considered for such presentations.
Research criteria for mild neurocognitive disorder
A. The presence of two (or more) of the following impairments in cognitive
functioning, lasting most of the time for a period of at least 2 weeks (as
reported by the individual or a reliable informant):
(1) memory impairment as identified by a reduced ability to learn or
recall information
(2) disturbance in executive functioning (i.e., planning, organizing,
sequencing, abstracting)
(3) disturbance in attention or speed of information processing
(4) impairment in perceptual-motor abilities
(5) impairment in language (e.g., comprehension, word finding)
B. There is objective evidence from physical examination or laboratory
findings (including neuroimaging techniques) of a neurological or
general medical condition that is judged to be etiologically related to
the cognitive disturbance.
C. There is evidence from neuropsychological testing or quantified cogni-
tive assessment of an abnormality or decline in performance.
D. The cognitive deficits cause marked distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning and represent a
decline from a previous level of functioning.
E. The cognitive disturbance does not meet criteria for a delirium, a
dementia, or an amnestic disorder and is not better accounted for by
another mental disorder (e.g., a Substance-Related Disorder, Major
Depressive Disorder).
Caffeine Withdrawal
Features
The essential feature is a characteristic withdrawal syndrome due to the abrupt cessation
of, or reduction in, the use of caffeine-containing products after prolonged daily use.
The syndrome includes headache and one (or more) of the following symptoms: marked
fatigue or drowsiness, marked anxiety or depression, or nausea or vomiting. These
symptoms appear to be more prevalent in individuals with heavy use (500 mg/day) but
may occur in individuals with light use (100 mg/day). The symptoms must cause clinicallyCaffeine Withdrawal
709
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning. The symptoms must not be due to the direct physiological effects of a
general medical condition and must not be better accounted for by another mental
disorder.
Associated Features
Associated symptoms include a strong desire for caffeine and worsened cognitive
performance (especially on vigilance tasks). Symptoms can begin within 12 hours of
cessation of caffeine use, peak around 24-48 hours, and last up to 1 week. Some
individuals may seek medical treatment for these symptoms without realizing they are
due to caffeine withdrawal.
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Caffeine-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
For a general discussion of the differential diagnosis of Substance-Related Disorders,
see p. 190. The symptoms must not be due to the direct physiological effects of a general
medical condition (e.g., migraine, viral illness) and must not be better accounted for
by another mental disorder. Headaches, fatigue, nausea, or vomiting due to a general
medical condition or due to the initiation or cessation of a medication can cause a
clinical picture similar to caffeine withdrawal. Drowsiness, fatigue, and mood changes
from caffeine withdrawal can mimic Amphetamine or Cocaine Withdrawal. The
temporal relationship of symptoms to caffeine cessation and the time-limited course of
the symptoms usually establish the diagnosis. If the diagnosis is unclear, a diagnostic
trial of caffeine can be of help.
Research criteria for caffeine withdrawal
A. Prolonged daily use of caffeine.
B. Abrupt cessation of caffeine use, or reduction in the amount of caffeine
used, closely followed by headache and one (or more) of the following
symptoms:
(1) marked fatigue or drowsiness
(2) marked anxiety or depression
(3) nausea or vomiting
C. The symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a general
medical condition (e.g., migraine, viral illness) and are not better
accounted for by another mental disorder.710
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Alternative Dimensional Descriptors for Schizophrenia
Because of limitations in the classical subtyping of Schizophrenia (see p. 286), a
three-factor dimensional model (psychotic, disorganized, and negative) has been
suggested to describe current and lifetime symptomatology. The psychotic factor
includes delusions and hallucinations. The disorganized factor includes disorganized
speech, disorganized behavior, and inappropriate affect. The negative factor includes
the various negative symptoms. Studies suggest that the severity of symptoms within
each of these three factors tends to vary together, both cross-sectionally and over time,
whereas this is less true for symptoms across factors. For example, as delusions become
more severe, hallucinations tend to become more severe as well. In contrast, the severity
of negative or disorganized symptoms is less related to the severity of hallucinations or
delusions. One model for understanding the clinical heterogeneity of Schizophrenia
suggests that each of these three dimensions may have different underlying patho-
physiological processes and treatment responses. Various combinations of severity on
the three dimensions are encountered in clinical practice, and it is relatively uncommon
for one dimension to be present in the complete absence of both of the others. The
following is a system for applying these dimensions in research and clinical studies.
I Alternative dimensional descriptors for Schizophrenia
Specify: absent, mild, moderate, severe for each dimension. The prominence
of these dimensions may be specified for either (or both) the current
episode (i.e., previous 6 months) or the lifetime course of the disorder.
psychotic (hallucinations/delusions) dimension: describes the
degree to which hallucinations or delusions have been present
disorganized dimension: describes the degree to which disorganized
speech, disorganized behavior, or inappropriate affect have been present
negative (deficit) dimension: describes the degree to which negative
symptoms (i.e., affective flattening, alogia, avolition) have been present.
Note: Do not include symptoms that appear to be secondaiy to
depression, medication side effects, or hallucinations or delusions.
Two examples that include the DSM-IV subtype, course specifiers, and the proposed
dimensional approach are
Example 1
295.30 Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type, Continuous
Current:
With severe psychotic dimension
With absent disorganized dimension
With moderate negative dimensionPostpsychotic Depressive Disorder of Schizophrenia
711
Lifetime:
With mild psychotic dimension
With absent disorganized dimension
With mild negative dimension
Example 2
295.60 Schizophrenia, Residual Type, Episodic With Residual Symptoms
Current:
With mild psychotic dimension
With mild disorganized dimension
With mild negative dimension
Lifetime:
With moderate psychotic dimension
With mild disorganized dimension
With mild negative dimension
Postpsychotic Depressive Disorder of Schizophrenia
Features
The essential feature is a Major Depressive Episode (see p. 320) that is superimposed
on, and occurs only during, the residual phase of Schizophrenia. The residual phase of
Schizophrenia follows the active phase (i.e., symptoms meeting Criterion A) of Schizo-
phrenia. It is characterized by the persistence of negative symptoms or of active-phase
symptoms that are in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual
experiences). The superimposed Major Depressive Episode must include depressed
mood (i.e., loss of interest or pleasure cannot serve as an alternate for sad or depressed
mood). Most typically, the Major Depressive Episode follows immediately after remission
of the active-phase symptoms of the psychotic episode. Sometimes it may follow after
a short or extended interval during which there are no psychotic symptoms. Mood
symptoms due to the direct physiological effects of a drug of abuse, a medication, or a
general medical condition are not counted toward postpsychotic depressive disorder of
Schizophrenia.
Associated Features
As compared with individuals with Schizophrenia without postpsychotic depressive
episodes, these individuals are more likely to be living alone and to have fewer social
supports. Other risk factors may include a larger number of previous hospitalizations,
history of psychotic relapses while being treated with antipsychotic medications,
insidious onset of psychotic episodes, prior episodes of depression, and prior suicide
attempts. There may be recent losses, undesirable life events, and other stressors. Up to
25% of individuals with Schizophrenia may have this condition sometime in the course
of their illness. Males and females seem equally vulnerable. These individuals appear
more likely to relapse into a psychotic episode or to be rehospitalized than those without
depression. Individuals with Schizophrenia who also have first-degree biological rela-
tives with histories of Major Depressive Disorder may be at higher risk for postpsychotic
depressions. This condition is associated with suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and
completed suicides.712
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is distinguished from this
disturbance by the fact that the depressive symptoms are due to the direct physiological
effects of a general medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism). Substance-Induced Mood
Disorder is distinguished from this disturbance by the fact that the depressive symptoms
are due to the direct physiological effects of a drug of abuse (e.g., alcohol, cocaine) or
the side effects of a medication. Individuals with Schizophrenia are often on maintenance
neuroleptic medications, which can cause dysphoria or Medication-Induced Movement
Disorders as side effects. These side effects can be confused with depressive symptoms.
Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism with akinesia (see p. 736) is characterized by a
reduced ability to initiate or sustain behaviors, which can lead to a lack of spontaneity
or anhedonia. Neuroleptic-InducedAkathisia (see p. 744) may be mistaken for anxiety
or agitation, and depressed mood or suicidal ideation may be associated. Adjusting the
medication type or dose may assist in reducing these side effects and clarifying the cause
of such symptoms.
The differential diagnosis between postpsychotic depressive symptoms and the
negative symptoms of Schizophrenia (i.e., avolition, alogia, affective flattening) may
be particularly difficult. Negative symptoms must be distinguished from the other
symptoms of depression (e.g., sadness, guilt, shame, hopelessness, helplessness, and
low self-esteem). In Schizoaffective Disorder and Mood Disorder With Psychotic
Features, there must be a period of overlap between the full psychotic episode and the
mood episode. In contrast, this proposed disorder requires that the symptoms of a Major
Depressive Episode occur only during the residual phase of Schizophrenia.
Demoralization may occur during the course of Schizophrenia but should not be
considered postpsychotic depression unless the full criteria for a Major Depressive
Episode are met. Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood is distinguished from
postpsychotic depressive symptoms in Schizophrenia because the depressive symptoms
in Adjustment Disorder do not meet the criteria for a Major Depressive Episode.
Research criteria for postpsychotic depressive
disorder of Schizophrenia
A. Criteria are met for a Major Depressive Episode.
Note: The Major Depressive Episode must include Criterion Al: depressed
mood. Do not include symptoms that are better accounted for as medication
side effects or negative symptoms of Schizophrenia.
B. The Major Depressive Episode is superimposed on and occurs only
during the residual phase of Schizophrenia.
C. The Major Depressive Episode is not due to the direct physiological
effects of a substance or a general medical condition.Simple Deteriorative Disorder (Simple Schizophrenia)
713
Simple Deteriorative Disorder (Simple Schizophrenia)
Features
The essential feature is the development of prominent negative symptoms, which
represent a clear change from a preestablished baseline. These symptoms are severe
enough to result in a marked decline in occupational or academic functioning. If positive
psychotic symptoms (e.g., hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech, disorganized
behavior, catatonic behavior) have ever been present, they have not been prominent.
This pattern should be considered only after all other possible causes for the deterioration
have been ruled out, that is, the presentation is not better accounted for by Schizotypal
or Schizoid Personality Disorder; a Psychotic, Mood, or Anxiety Disorder; a dementia;
or Mental Retardation; nor are the symptoms due to the direct physiological effects of
a substance or a general medical condition. There is an insidious and progressive
development of negative symptoms over a period of at least 1 year beginning in
adolescence or later. Emotional responses become blunted, shallow, flat, and empty.
Speech becomes impoverished of words and meanings. There is a definite change in
"personality," with a marked loss of interpersonal rapport. Close relationships lose
warmth and mutuality, social interaction generally becomes awkward, and isolation and
withdrawal result. Initiative gives way to apathy, and ambition to avolition. Loss of
interest extends to the daily details of self-care. The person may appear forgetful and
absentminded. Academic or job skills are lost, resulting in a pattern of brief, simple jobs
and frequent unemployment.
Associated Features
Any of the features of Schizoid or Schizotypal Personality Disorder may be present. Most
common are peculiarities of grooming and behavior, lapses in hygiene, overinvestment
in odd ideas, or unusual perceptual experiences such as illusions. This proposed disorder
may occur in adolescents and adults of both sexes. Good estimates of prevalence and
incidence are not available, but it is clear that the disorder is rare. The course, at least
for the first few years, is progressively downhill, with prominent deterioration of
functioning. This deterioration in functioning resembles the characteristic course of
Schizophrenia and distinguishes this condition from Schizoid and Schizotypal Personality
Disorders. Symptoms meeting Criterion A for Schizophrenia may emerge, at which time
the diagnosis is changed to Schizophrenia. In these instances, this pattern proves to have
been a prolonged prodrome to Schizophrenia. In other cases this pattern recedes in
severity, as can happen with Schizophrenia. For the majority of individuals, the course
is continuous, with deterioration occurring within the first few years after prodromal
symptoms and then plateauing to a marginal and reduced, but stable, functional capacity.
Differential
Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Unspecified Mental Disorder.
This pattern should be considered only after all other possible causes of deterioration
in functioning have been ruled out. This pattern is distinguished from the disorders
included in the "Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders" section by the absence714
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
of prominent positive psychotic symptoms. These disorders include Schizophrenia,
Schizoaffective Disorder, Schizophreniform Disorder, Brief Psychotic Disorder,
Delusional Disorder, Shared Psychotic Disorder, and Psychotic Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified, all of which require at least one positive symptom for some period
of time. This proposed disorder is distinguished from Schizoid and Schizotypal
Personality Disorders as well as other Personality Disorders by the requirement of a
clear change in personality and marked deterioration in functioning. In contrast, the
Personality Disorders represent lifelong patterns without progressive deterioration.
Mood Disorders may mimic the apathy and anhedonia of simple deteriorative disorder,
but in a Mood Disorder depressive affect (sadness, hopelessness, helplessness, painful
guilt) is experienced, and the course tends to be episodic. Furthermore, in simple
deteriorative disorder, there is a sense of emptiness rather than a painful or prominently
depressive mood, and the course is continuous and progressive. The distinction can be
more difficult with Dysthymic Disorder, in which the course may also be continuous
and in which vegetative symptoms and painfully depressive mood may not be
prominent. This proposed disorder may mimic chronic Substance Dependence and
should only be considered if the personality change and deterioration precede extensive
substance use. Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition is distin-
guished by the presence of an etiological general medical condition. The cognitive
impairment of simple deteriorative disorder may be mistaken for Mental Retardation
or dementia. Mental Retardation is distinguished by its typical onset in infancy or
childhood. Dementia is distinguished by the presence of an etiological general medical
condition or substance use.
Perhaps the most difficult differential diagnosis is with no mental disorder. Simple
deteriorative disorder often leads a person to become a marginal member of society. It
does not follow, however, that marginal members of society necessarily have this
proposed disorder. The defining features of simple deteriorative disorder involve
negative symptoms, which tend to be more on a continuum with normality than are
positive symptoms and which may be mimicked by a variety of factors (see the relevant
discussion in the "Schizophrenia" section, p. 276). Therefore, special caution must be
taken not to apply this proposed disorder too broadly.
Research criteria for simple deteriorative disorder
(simple Schizophrenia)
A. Progressive development over a period of at least a year of all of the
following:
(1) marked decline in occupational or academic functioning
(2) gradual appearance and deepening of negative symptoms such as
affective flattening, alogia, and a volition
(3) poor interpersonal rapport, social isolation, or social withdrawal
B. Criterion A for Schizophrenia has never been met.
(continued)Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
715
Q Research criteria for simple deteriorative disorder (simple
Schizophrenia) (continued)
C. The symptoms are not better accounted for by Schizotypal or Schizoid
Personality Disorder, a Psychotic Disorder, a Mood Disorder, an Anxiety
Disorder, a dementia, or Mental Retardation and are not due to the direct
physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Features
The essential features are symptoms such as markedly depressed mood, marked anxiety,
marked affective lability, and decreased interest in activities. These symptoms have
regularly occurred during the last week of the luteal phase in most menstrual cycles
during the past year. The symptoms begin to remit within a few days of the onset of
menses (the follicular phase) and are always absent in the week following menses.
Five (or more) of the following symptoms must have been present most of the time
during the last week of the luteal phase, with at least one of the symptoms being one
of the first four: 1) feeling sad, hopeless, or self-deprecating; 2) feeling tense, anxious
or "on edge"; 3) marked lability of mood interspersed with frequent tearfulness;
4) persistent irritability, anger, and increased interpersonal conflicts; 5) decreased interest
in usual activities, which may be associated with withdrawal from social relationships;
6) difficulty concentrating; 7) feeling fatigued, lethargic, or lacking in energy; 8) marked
changes in appetite, which may be associated with binge eating or craving certain foods;
9) hypersomnia or insomnia; 10) a subjective feeling of being overwhelmed or out of
control; and 11) physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, headaches,
or sensations of "bloating" or weight gain, with tightness of fit of clothing, shoes, or
rings. There may also be joint or muscle pain. The symptoms may be accompanied by
suicidal thoughts.
This pattern of symptoms must have occurred most months for the previous
12 months. The symptoms disappear completely shortly after the onset of menstruation.
The most typical pattern seems to be that of dysfunction during the week prior to menses
that ends mid-menses. Atypically, some females also have symptoms for a few days
around ovulation; a few females with short cycles might, therefore, be symptom free for
only 1 week per cycle.
Typically, the symptoms are of comparable severity (but not duration) to those of
a Major Depressive Episode and must cause an obvious and marked impairment in the
ability to function socially or occupationally in the week prior to menses. Impairment
in social functioning may be manifested by marital discord and problems with friends
and family. It is very important not to confuse long-standing marital or job problems
with the dysfunction that occurs only premenstrually. There is a great contrast between
the woman's depressed feelings and difficulty in functioning during these days and her
mood and capabilities the rest of the month. These symptoms may be superimposed on
another disorder but are not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of another disorder,
such as Major Depressive, Panic, or Dysthymic Disorder, or a Personality Disorder. The716
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
presence of the cyclical pattern of symptoms must be confirmed by at least 2 consecutive
months of prospective daily symptom ratings. Daily symptom ratings must be done by
the woman and can also be done by someone with whom she lives. It is important that
these diaries be kept on a daily basis rather than composed retrospectively from memory.
Associated Features
Females who have had recurrent Major Depressive Disorder or Bipolar I or II Disorder
or a family history of such disorders may be at greater risk to have a disturbance that
meets the research criteria for premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Females who have had
severe postpartum Major Depressive, Manic, or psychotic episodes may also be at greater
risk for severe premenstrual dysphoric mood changes. Frequently there is a history of
prior Mood and Anxiety Disorders. Delusions and hallucinations have been described
in the late luteal phase of the menstrual cycle but are very rare.
Although females with the combination of dysmenorrhea (painful menses) and
premenstrual dysphoric disorder are somewhat more likely to seek treatment than
females with only one of these conditions, most females with either of the conditions
do not have the other condition. A wide range of general medical conditions may worsen
in the premenstrual or luteal phase (e.g., migraine, asthma, allergies, and seizure
disorders). There are no specific laboratory tests that are diagnostic of the disturbance.
However, in several small preliminary studies, certain laboratory findings (e.g., serotonin
or melatonin secretion patterns, sleep EEC findings) have been noted to be abnormal
in groups of females with this proposed disorder relative to control subjects.
It is estimated that at least 75% of women report minor or isolated premenstrual
changes. Limited studies suggest an occurrence of "premenstrual syndrome" (variably
defined) of 20%-50%, and that 3%-5% of women experience symptoms that may meet
the criteria for this proposed disorder. There has been very little systematic study on the
course and stability of this condition. Premenstrual symptoms can begin at any age after
menarche, with the onset most commonly occurring during the teens to late 20s. Those
who seek treatment are usually in their 30s. Symptoms usually remit with menopause.
Although symptoms do not necessarily occur every cycle, they are present for the majority
of the cycles. Some months the symptoms may be worse than others. Women commonly
report that their symptoms worsen with age until relieved by the onset of menopause.
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
The transient mood changes that many females experience around the time of their
period should not be considered a mental disorder. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
should be considered only when the symptoms markedly interfere with work or school
or with usual social activities and relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of social
activities, decreased productivity and efficiency at work or school). Premenstrual
dysphoric disorder can be distinguished from the far more common "premenstrual
syndrome" by using prospective daily ratings and the strict criteria listed below. It
differs from the "premenstrual syndrome" in its characteristic pattern of symptoms, their
severity, and the resulting impairment.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder must be distinguished from the premenstrual
exacerbation of a current mental disorder (e.g., Mood Disorders, Anxiety Disorders,Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
717
Somatoform Disorders, Bulimia Nervosa, Substance Use Disorders, and Personality
Disorders). In such situations (which are far more common than premenstrual dysphoric
disorder), there is a premenstrual worsening of the symptoms but the symptoms persist
throughout the menstrual cycle. Although this condition should not be considered in
females who are experiencing only a premenstrual exacerbation of another mental
disorder, it can be considered in addition to the diagnosis of another current mental
disorder if the woman experiences symptoms and changes in level of functioning that
are characteristic of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and are markedly different from
the symptoms experienced as part of the ongoing disorder.
Some individuals with general medical conditions may present with dysphoria
and fatigue that are exacerbated during the premenstrual period. Examples include
seizure disorders, thyroid and other endocrine disorders, cancer, systemic lupus
erythematosus, anemias, endometriosis, and various infections. These general medical
conditions can be distinguished from premenstrual dysphoric disorder by history,
laboratory testing, or physical examination.
Research criteria for premenstrual dysphoric disorder
A. In most menstrual cycles during the past year, five (or more) of the
following symptoms were present for most of the time during the last
week of the luteal phase, began to remit within a few days after the
onset of the follicular phase, and were absent in the week postmenses,
with at least one of the symptoms being either (1), (2), (3), or (4):
(1) markedly depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-
deprecating thoughts
(2) marked anxiety, tension, feelings of being "keyed up," or "on
edge"
(3) marked affective lability (e.g., feeling suddenly sad or tearful or
increased sensitivity to rejection)
(4) persistent and marked anger or irritability or increased interper-
sonal conflicts
(5) decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school, friends,
hobbies)
(6) subjective sense of difficulty in concentrating
(7) lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy
(8) marked change in appetite, overeating, or specific food cravings
(9) hypersomnia or insomnia
(10) a subjective sense of being overwhelmed or out of control
(11) other physical symptoms, such as breast tenderness or swelling,
headaches, joint or muscle pain, a sensation of "bloating," weight
gain
Note: In menstruating females, the luteal phase corresponds to the period between
ovulation and the onset of menses, and the follicular phase begins with menses. In
nonmenstruating females (e.g., those who have had a hysterectomy), the timing of
luteal and follicular phases may require measurement of circulating reproductive
hormones.
(continued)718
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
D Research criteria for premenstrual dysphoric disorder
(continued)
B. The disturbance markedly interferes with work or school or with usual
social activities and relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of social
activities, decreased productivity and efficiency at work or school).
C. The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of
another disorder, such as Major Depressive Disorder, Panic Disorder,
Dysthymic Disorder, or a Personality Disorder (although it may be
superimposed on any of these disorders).
D. Criteria A, B, and C must be confirmed by prospective daily ratings
during at least two consecutive symptomatic cycles. (The diagnosis may
be made provisionally prior to this confirmation.)
Alternative Criterion B for Dysthymic Disorder
There has been some controversy concerning which symptoms best define Dysthymic
Disorder. The results of the DSM-IV Mood Disorders field trial suggest that the following
alternative version of Criterion B may be more characteristic of Dysthymic Disorder than
the version of Criterion B that was in DSM-III-R and is in DSM-IV. However, it was
decided that additional confirmatory evidence needs to be collected before these items
are incorporated in the official definition of Dysthymic Disorder.
Alternative Research Criterion B for Dysthymic
Disorder
B. Presence, while depressed, of three (or more) of the following:
(1) low self-esteem or self-confidence, or feelings of inadequacy
(2) feelings of pessimism, despair, or hopelessness
(3) generalized loss of interest or pleasure
(4) social withdrawal
(5) chronic fatigue or tiredness
(6) feelings of guilt, brooding about the past
(7) subjective feelings of irritability or excessive anger
(8) decreased activity, effectiveness, or productivity
(9) difficulty in thinking, reflected by poor concentration, poor
memory, or indecisivenessMinor Depressive Disorder
719
Minor Depressive Disorder
Features
The essential feature is one or more periods of depressive symptoms that are identical
to Major Depressive Episodes in duration, but which involve fewer symptoms and less
impairment. An episode involves either a sad or "depressed" mood or loss of interest or
pleasure in nearly all activities. In total, at least two but less than five additional symptoms
must be present. See the text for a Major Depressive Episode (p. 320) for a more detailed
description of the characteristic symptoms. At the onset of the episode, the symptoms
are either newly present or must be clearly worsened compared with the person's
preepisode status. During the episode, these symptoms cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
In some individuals, there may be near-normal functioning, but this is accomplished
with significantly increased effort.
A number of disorders exclude consideration of this proposed disorder. There has
never been a Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode, and criteria are
not met for Dysthymic or Cyclothymic Disorder. The mood disturbance does not occur
exclusively during Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, Schizoaffective Disorder,
Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Associated Features
The prevalence of this proposed disorder as defined here is unclear, but it may be
relatively common, especially in primary care and outpatient mental health settings.
A number of general medical conditions (e.g., stroke, cancer, and diabetes) appear to
be associated. Family studies suggest an increase in this symptom pattern among relatives
of probands with Major Depressive Disorder.
Differential
Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood if the depressive
symptoms occur in response to a psychosocial stressor; otherwise, the appropriate
diagnosis is Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
An episode of minor depressive disorder is distinguished from a Major Depressive
Episode by the required number of symptoms (two to four symptoms for minor
depressive disorder and at least five symptoms for a Major Depressive Episode). This
proposed disorder is considered to be a residual category and is not to be used if there
is a history of a Major Depressive Episode, Manic Episode, Mixed Episode, or
Hypomanic Episode, or if the presentation meets criteria for Dysthymic or Cyclo-
thymic Disorder. Symptoms meeting research criteria for minor depressive disorder
can be difficult to distinguish from periods of sadness that are an inherent part of
everyday life. This proposed disorder requires that the depressive symptoms be present
for most of the day nearly every day for at least 2 weeks. In addition, the depressive
symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment. Depressive symptoms
occurring in response to the loss of a loved one are considered Bereavement (unless
they meet the criteria for a Major Depressive Episode; see p. 320). Substance-Induced720
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Mood Disorder is distinguished from this disturbance in that the depressive symptoms
are due to the direct physiological effects of a drug of abuse (e.g., alcohol or cocaine)
or the side effects of a medication (e.g., steroids) (see p. 370). Mood Disorder Due to
a General Medical Condition is distinguished from this disturbance in that the
depressive symptoms are due to the direct physiological effects of a general medical
condition (e.g., hypothyroidism) (see p. 366). Because depressive symptoms are com-
mon associated features of psychotic disorders, they do not receive a separate diagnosis
if they occur exclusively during Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder,
Schizoaffective Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not Other-
wise Specified. The relationship between this proposed disorder and several other
proposed categories included in this appendix (i.e., recurrent brief depressive disorder,
depressive personality disorder, and mixed anxiety-depressive disorder) and with other
Personality Disorders is not known, but substantial overlap may exist among them.
Research criteria for minor depressive disorder
A. A mood disturbance, defined as follows:
(1) at least two (but less than five) of the following symptoms have
been present during the same 2-week period and represent a
change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms is
either (a) or (b):
(a) depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as
indicated by either subjective report (e.g., feels sad or empty)
or observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful).
Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.
(b) markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all,
activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by
either subjective account or observation made by others)
(c) significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g.,
a change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or
decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day. Note: In
children, consider failure to make expected weight gains.
(d) insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day
(e) psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (ob-
servable by others, not merely subjective feelings of restless-
ness or being slowed down)
(f) fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day
(g) feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt
(which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely
self-reproach or guilt about being sick)
(h) diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness,
nearly every day (either by subjective account or as observed
by others)
(continued)Recurrent Brief Depressive Disorder
721
D Research criteria for minor depressive disorder (continued)
(i)
recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent
suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt
or a specific plan for committing suicide
(2) the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning
(3) the symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hypothyroidism)
(4) the symptoms are not better accounted for by Bereavement (i.e.,
a normal reaction to the death of a loved one)
B. There has never been a Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327), and
criteria are not met for Dysthymic Disorder.
C. There has never been a Manic Episode (see p. 332), a Mixed Episode
(see p. 335), or a Hypomanic Episode (see p. 338), and criteria are not
met for Cyclothymic Disorder. Note: This exclusion does not apply if
all of the manic-, mixed-, or hypomanic-like episodes are substance or
treatment induced.
D. The mood disturbance does not occur exclusively during Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Schizoaffective Disorder, Delusional Disor-
der, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Recurrent Brief Depressive Disorder
Features
The essential feature is the recurrence of brief episodes of depressive symptoms that are
identical to Major Depressive Episodes in the number and severity of symptoms but that
do not meet the 2-week duration requirement. See the text for a Major Depressive
Episode (p. 320) for a more detailed description of the characteristic symptoms. The
episodes last at least 2 days but less than 2 weeks and most typically have a duration
of between 2 and 4 days. Episodes must recur at least once a month for a period of
12 consecutive months, and they must not be associated exclusively with the menstrual
cycle. The brief depressive episodes must cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. In some individuals,
there may be near-normal functioning, but this is accomplished with significantly
increased effort.
A number of disorders exclude consideration of this proposed disorder. There has
never been a Major Depressive, Manic, Mixed, or Hypomanic Episode, and criteria are
not met for Dysthymic or Cyclothymic Disorder. The mood disturbance does not occur
exclusively during Schizophrenia, Schizophreniform Disorder, Schizoaffective Disorder,
Delusional Disorder, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.722
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Associated Features
The pattern of lifetime or current comorbidity appears to be similar to that of Major
Depressive Disorder. Associated disorders may include Substance-Related Disorders and
Anxiety Disorders. The episodes may follow a seasonal pattern. The 1-year prevalence
of this proposed disorder has been reported to be about 7% (although this was often in
association with other established mental disorders). Males and females appear equally
likely to experience recurrent brief depressive episodes, and the most typical age at
onset appears to be in adolescence. Suicide attempts are the most serious complication.
The rate of depressive disorders is increased in the first-degree biological relatives of
individuals who have recurrent brief depressive episodes.
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Depressive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
An episode of recurrent brief depressive disorder is distinguished from a Major
Depressive Episode by the duration of the episode (2-13 days for a brief depressive
episode and 2 weeks or longer for a Major Depressive Episode). Recurrent brief
depressive disorder is considered to be a residual category and is not to be used if there
is a history of a Major Depressive Episode, Manic Episode, Mixed Episode, or
Hypomanic Episode, or if criteria are met for Cyclothymic Disorder or Dysthymic
Disorder. Substance-Induced Mood Disorder is distinguished from this disturbance
in that the depressive symptoms are due to the direct physiological effects of a drug of
abuse (e.g., alcohol or cocaine) or the side effects of a medication (e.g., steroids) (see
p. 370). Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is distinguished from
this disturbance in that the depressive symptoms are due to the direct physiological
effects of a general medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism) (see p. 366). Because
depressive symptoms are common associated features of psychotic disorders, they do
not receive a separate diagnosis if they occur exclusively during Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Schizoaffective Disorder, Delusional Disorder, or
Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. Recurrent brief depressive disorder
shares some clinical features with Borderline Personality Disorder (i.e., both
disorders manifest brief and episodic depressive symptoms such as suicidal ideation or
sadness). In cases where a Personality Disorder and this proposed disorder are both
present, both may be noted (with recurrent brief depressive disorder noted as Depressive
Disorder Not Otherwise Specified). The relationship between this proposed disorder
and several other proposed categories included in this appendix (i.e., minor depressive
disorder, depressive personality disorder, and mixed anxiety-depressive disorder) and with
other Personality Disorders is not known, but substantial overlap may exist among
them.Mixed Anxiety-Depressive Disorder
723
Research criteria for recurrent brief depressive
disorder
A. Criteria, except for duration, are met for a Major Depressive Episode
(see p. 327).
B. The depressive periods in Criterion A last at least 2 days but less than
2 weeks.
C. The depressive periods occur at least once a month for 12 consecutive
months and are not associated with the menstrual cycle.
D. The periods of depressed mood cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of func-
tioning.
E. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition (e.g., hypothyroidism).
F. There has never been a Major Depressive Episode (see p. 327), and
criteria are not met for Dysthymic Disorder.
G. There has never been a Manic Episode (see p. 332), a Mixed Episode
(see p. 335), or a Hypomanic Episode (see p. 338), and criteria are not
met for Cyclothymic Disorder. Note: This exclusion does not apply if
all of the manic-, mixed-, or hypomanic-like episodes are substance or
treatment induced.
H. The mood disturbance does not occur exclusively during Schizophrenia,
Schizophreniform Disorder, Schizoaffective Disorder, Delusional Disor-
der, or Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Mixed Anxiety-Depressive Disorder
Features
The essential feature is a persistent or recurrent dysphoric mood lasting at least 1 month.
The dysphoric mood is accompanied by additional symptoms that also must persist for
at least 1 month and include at least four of the following: concentration or memory
difficulties, sleep disturbance, fatigue or low energy, irritability, worry, being easily
moved to tears, hypervigilance, anticipating the worst, hopelessness or pessimism about
the future, and low self-esteem or feelings of worthlessness. The symptoms must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning. This proposed disorder should not be considered if the symptoms
are due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition
or if the criteria for Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic Disorder, Panic Disorder, or724
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Generalized Anxiety Disorder have ever been met. The diagnosis is also not made if the
criteria for any other Anxiety or Mood Disorder are currently met, even if the Anxiety
or Mood Disorder is in partial remission. The symptoms must also not be better accounted
for by any other mental disorder. Much of the initial information about this condition
has been collected in primary care settings, in which the disorder appears to be common;
it may also be quite common in outpatient mental health settings.
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Anxiety Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder is distinguished from this disturbance in
that the symptoms of dysphoria are due to the direct physiological effects of a drug of
abuse (e.g., alcohol or cocaine) or the side effects of a medication (e.g., steroids) (see
p. 439). Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition is distinguished from
this disturbance in that the symptoms of dysphoria are due to the direct physiological
effects of a general medical condition (e.g., pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism) (see
p. 436). The symptoms described in this presentation are a frequent associated feature
of many mental disorders and therefore should not be diagnosed separately if better
accounted for by any other mental disorder. This condition should also not be considered
in individuals with a current or past history of Major Depressive Disorder, Dysthymic
Disorder, Panic Disorder, or Generalized Anxiety Disorder or with any other
current Mood or Anxiety Disorder (including those in partial remission). This presenta-
tion is also distinguished from no mental disorder by the facts that the symptoms are
persistent or recurrent and that they cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
The relationship between this proposed disorder and several other proposed
categories included in this appendix (i.e., minor depressive disorder, recurrent brief
depressive disorder, and depressive personality disorder) and with other Personality
Disorders is not known, but substantial overlap may exist among them.
Research criteria for mixed anxiety-depressive
disorder
A. Persistent or recurrent dysphoric mood lasting at least 1 month.
B. The dysphoric mood is accompanied by at least 1 month of four (or
more) of the following symptoms:
(1) difficulty concentrating or mind going blank
(2) sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless
unsatisfying sleep)
(3) fatigue or low energy
(4) irritability
(5) worry
(continued)Factitious Disorder by Proxy
725
Research criteria for mixed anxiety-depressive disorder
(continued)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
being easily moved to tears
hypervigilance
anticipating the worst
hopelessness (pervasive pessimism about the future)
low self-esteem or feelings of worthlessness
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or a general medical
condition.
E. All of the following:
(1) criteria have never been met for Major Depressive Disorder,
Dysthymic Disorder, Panic Disorder, or Generalized Anxiety Dis-
order
(2) criteria are not currently met for any other Anxiety or Mood
Disorder (including an Anxiety or Mood Disorder, In Partial
Remission)
(3) the symptoms are not better accounted for by any other mental
disorder
Factitious Disorder by Proxy
Features
The essential feature is the deliberate production or feigning of physical or psychological
signs or symptoms in another person who is under the individual's care. Typically the
victim is a young child and the perpetrator is the child's mother. The motivation for the
perpetrator's behavior is presumed to be a psychological need to assume the sick role
by proxy. External incentives for the behavior, such as economic gain, are absent. The
behavior is not better accounted for by another mental disorder. The perpetrator induces
or simulates the illness or disease process in the victim and then presents the victim for
medical care while disclaiming any knowledge about the actual etiology of the problem.
The majority of induced and simulated conditions involve the gastrointestinal, the
genitourinary, and the central nervous systems; the simulation of mental disorders in the
victim is much less frequently reported. The type and severity of signs and symptoms
are limited only by the medical sophistication and opportunities of the perpetrator. Cases
are often characterized by an atypical clinical course in the victim and inconsistent
laboratory test results that are at variance with the seeming health of the victim.
The victim is usually a preschool child, although newborns, adolescents, and adults726
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
may be used as victims. With older children, consideration should be given to the
possibility of collaboration with the perpetrator in the production of signs and symptoms.
The perpetrator receives a diagnosis of factitious disorder by proxy. For the victim,
Physical Abuse of Child (995.5) or Physical Abuse of Adult (995.81) may be noted if
appropriate. In the event of voluntary collaboration, an additional diagnosis of Factitious
Disorder may be appropriate for the collaborator.
Associated Features
Life stressors, especially marital conflict, may trigger the behavior. Perpetrators may
exhibit pathological lying (or pseudologia fantastica) in describing everyday experiences
and when presenting the victim for medical care. They commonly have considerable
experience in health-related areas and seem to thrive in a medical environment. Despite
their medical knowledge, they often seem insufficiently concerned with the apparent
severity of the victim's condition. Victims may suffer a significant morbidity and mortality
rate as a consequence of the induced conditions and are at increased risk of developing
Factitious Disorder themselves as they mature. The perpetrator is usually the mother,
and the father usually appears uninvolved. Sometimes, however, the father or husband
may collaborate with the mother or may act alone. The perpetrator may also be a spouse
or another caregiver (e.g., a baby-sitter). Perpetrators may have a history of having been
abused. Somatoform Disorders and Personality Disorders may be present.
This proposed disorder often coexists with Factitious Disorder, which is usually
quiescent as long as the perpetrator can induce or simulate a factitious illness in the
victim. When confronted with the consequences of their behavior, perpetrators may
become depressed and suicidal. Some become angry with the health care providers,
deny the accusations, attempt to remove the victim from the hospital against medical
advice, and seek care from other providers even at a considerable distance. Perpetrators
may face criminal charges ranging from abuse to murder. Typically the perpetrator
focuses on only one victim at a time, although other siblings or individuals may have
been or might become victims.
Differential
Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, an individual (i.e., the perpetrator) whose presentation meets these research
criteria would be diagnosed as having Factitious Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Factitious disorder by proxy must be distinguished from a general medical
condition or a mental disorder in the individual being brought for treatment. Factitiou
disorder by proxy must also be distinguished from physical or sexual abuse that is
not related to the goal of indirectly assuming the sick role. Malingering differs from
factitious disorder by proxy in that the motivation for the symptom production in
Malingering is an external incentive, whereas in Factitious Disorder external incentives
are absent. Individuals with Malingering may seek hospitalization for an individual under
their care by producing symptoms in an attempt to obtain compensation.Dissociative Trance Disorder
727
Research criteria for factitious disorder by proxy
A. Intentional production or feigning of physical or psychological signs or
symptoms in another person who is under the individual's care.
B. The motivation for the perpetrator's behavior is to assume the sick role
by proxy.
C. External incentives for the behavior (such as economic gain) are absent.
D. The behavior is not better accounted for by another mental disorder.
Dissociative Trance Disorder
Features
The essential feature is an involuntary state of trance that is not accepted by the person's
culture as a normal part of a collective cultural or religious practice and that causes
clinically significant distress or functional impairment. This proposed disorder should
not be considered in individuals who enter trance or possession states voluntarily and
without distress in the context of cultural and religious practices that are broadly accepted
by the person's cultural group. Such voluntary and nonpathological states are common
and constitute the overwhelming majority of trance and possession trance states
encountered cross-culturally. However, some individuals undergoing culturally norma-
tive trance or possession trance states may develop symptoms that cause distress or
impairment and thus could be considered for this proposed disorder. Specific local
instances of dissociative trance disorder show considerable variation cross-culturally with
regard to the precise nature of the behaviors performed during the altered state, the
presence or absence of dissociative sensory alterations (e.g., blindness), the identity
assumed during these states, and the degree of amnesia experienced following the altered
state (for examples, see Appendix I's Glossary of Culture-Bound Syndromes, p. 844).
In trance, the loss of customary identity is not associated with the appearance of
alternate identities, and the actions performed during a trance state are generally not
complex (e.g., convulsive movements, falling, running). In possession trance, there is
the appearance of one (or several) distinct alternate identities with characteristic
behaviors, memories, and attitudes, and the activities performed by the person tend to
be more complex (e.g., coherent conversations, characteristic gestures, facial expres-
sions, and specific verbalizations that are culturally established as belonging to a
particular possessing agent). Full or partial amnesia is more regularly reported after an
episode of possession trance than after an episode of trance (although reports of amnesia
after trance are not uncommon). Many individuals with this proposed disorder exhibit
features of only one type of trance, but some present with mixed symptomatology or
fluctuate between types of trance over time according to local cultural parameters.
Associated Features
Variants of these conditions have been described in nearly every traditional society on
every continent. The prevalence appears to decrease with increasing industrialization728
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
but remains elevated among traditional ethnic minorities in industrialized societies. There
are considerable local variations in age and mode of onset. The course is typically
episodic, with variable duration of acute episodes from minutes to hours. It has been
reported that during a trance state, individuals may have an increased pain threshold,
may consume inedible materials (e.g., glass), and may experience increased muscular
strength. The symptoms of a pathological trance may be heightened or reduced in
response to environmental cues and the ministrations of others. Presumed possessing
agents are usually spiritual in nature (e.g., spirits of the dead, supernatural entities, gods,
demons) and are often experienced as making demands or expressing animosity.
Individuals with pathological possession trance typically experience a limited number
of agents (one to five) in a sequential, not simultaneous, fashion. Complications include
suicide attempts, self-mutilation, and accidents. Sudden deaths have been reported as a
possible outcome, perhaps due to cardiac arrhythmias.
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Dissociative Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
This diagnosis should not be made if the trance state is judged to be due to the
direct physiological effects of a general medical condition (in which case the diagnosis
would be Mental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified Due to a General Medical
Condition, see p. 174) or a substance (in which case the diagnosis would be
Substance-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified).
The symptoms of the trance state (e.g., hearing or seeing spiritual beings and being
controlled or influenced by others) may be confused with the hallucinations and
delusions of Schizophrenia, Mood Disorder With Psychotic Features, or Brief
Psychotic Disorder. The trance state may be distinguished by its cultural congruency,
its briefer duration, and the absence of the characteristic symptoms of these other
disorders.
Individuals with Dissociative Identity Disorder can be distinguished from those
with trance and possession symptoms by the fact that those with trance and possession
symptoms typically describe external spirits or entities that have entered their bodies
and taken over.
This proposed disorder should not be considered in individuals who enter trance
or possession states voluntarily and without distress or impairment in the context of
cultural and religious practices.
Research criteria for dissociative trance disorder
A. Either (1) or (2):
(1) trance, i.e., temporary marked alteration in the state of conscious-
ness or loss of customary sense of personal identity without
replacement by an alternate identity, associated with at least one
of the following:
(continued)Binge-Eating Disorder
729
D Research criteria for dissociative trance disorder (continued)
(a) narrowing of awareness of immediate surroundings, or
unusually narrow and selective focusing on environmental
stimuli
(b) stereotyped behaviors or movements that are experienced as
being beyond one's control
(2) possession trance, a single or episodic alteration in the state of
consciousness characterized by the replacement of customary
sense of personal identity by a new identity. This is attributed to
the influence of a spirit, power, deity, or other person, as evidenced
by one (or more) of the following:
(a) stereotyped and culturally determined behaviors or move-
ments that are experienced as being controlled by the pos-
sessing agent
(b) full or partial amnesia for the event
B. The trance or possession trance state is not accepted as a normal part
of a collective cultural or religious practice.
C. The trance or possession trance state causes clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
D. The trance or possession trance state does not occur exclusively during
the course of a Psychotic Disorder (including Mood Disorder With
Psychotic Features and Brief Psychotic Disorder) or Dissociative Identity
Disorder and is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance
or a general medical condition.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Diagnostic Features
The essential features are recurrent episodes of binge eating associated with subjective
and behavioral indicators of impaired control over, and significant distress about, the
binge eating and the absence of the regular use of inappropriate compensatory behaviors
(such as self-induced vomiting, misuse of laxatives and other medications, fasting, and
excessive exercise) that are characteristic of Bulimia Nervosa. The characteristics of a
binge episode are discussed in the text for Bulimia Nervosa (p. 545). Indicators of
impaired control include eating very rapidly, eating until feeling uncomfortably full,
eating large amounts of food when not hungry, eating alone because of embarrassment
over how much one is eating, and feeling disgust, guilt, or depression after overeating.
The marked distress required for the diagnosis includes unpleasant feelings during and
after the binge episodes, as well as concerns about the long-term effect of the recurrent
binge episodes on body weight and shape.730
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Binge episodes must occur, on average, at least 2 days a week for a period of at
least 6 months. The duration of a binge-eating episode can vary greatly, and many
individuals have difficulty separating binge eating into discrete episodes. However, they
usually have little difficulty recalling whether or not binge eating occurred on a given
day. Thus, it is suggested that the number of days on which binge eating occurs be
counted, rather than the number of episodes of binge eating, as is done in making the
diagnosis of Bulimia Nervosa. Future research should address this issue.
The symptoms do not occur exclusively during Anorexia Nervosa or Bulimia
Nervosa. In addition, although some inappropriate compensatory behavior (e.g., purg-
ing, fasting, or excessive exercise) may occur occasionally, it is not regularly employed
to counteract the effects of the binge eating. Research studies conducted to date have
varied in how they have defined "regular use of inappropriate compensatory behaviors."
Some studies have equated "regular" with the twice-a-week frequency criterion of
Bulimia Nervosa and have considered individuals who engage in these behaviors less
than twice a week (but as often as once a week) to be eligible for the diagnosis of
binge-eating disorder. Other studies have excluded individuals who describe any use of
inappropriate compensatory behaviors during the episode of illness. Future research
should address this issue.
Associated Features and Disorders
Some individuals report that binge eating is triggered by dysphoric moods, such as
depression and anxiety. Others are unable to identify specific precipitants but may report
a nonspecific feeling of tension that is relieved by the binge eating. Some individuals
describe a dissociative quality to the binge episodes (feeling "numb" or "spaced out").
Many individuals eat throughout the day with no planned mealtimes.
Individuals with this eating pattern seen in clinical settings have varying degrees of
obesity. Most have a long history of repeated efforts to diet and feel desperate about
their difficulty in controlling food intake. Some continue to make attempts to restrict
calorie intake, whereas others have given up all efforts to diet because of repeated
failures. In weight-control clinics, individuals with this eating pattern are, on average,
more obese and have a history of more marked weight fluctuations than individuals
without this pattern. In nonpatient community samples, most individuals with this eating
pattern are overweight (although some have never been overweight).
Individuals with this eating pattern may report that their eating or weight interferes
with their relationships with other people, with their work, and with their ability to feel
good about themselves. In comparison with individuals of equal weight without this
pattern of eating, they report higher rates of self-loathing, disgust about body size,
depression, anxiety, somatic concern, and interpersonal sensitivity. There may be a
higher lifetime prevalence of Major Depressive Disorder, Substance-Related Disorders,
and Personality Disorders.
In samples drawn from weight-control programs, the overall prevalence varies from
approximately 15% to 50% (with a mean of 30%), with females approximately 1.5 times
more likely to have this eating pattern than males. In nonpatient community samples, a
prevalence rate of 0.7%-4% has been reported. The onset of binge eating typically is in
late adolescence or in the early 20s, often coming soon after significant weight loss from
dieting. Among individuals presenting for treatment, the course appears to be
chronic.Binge-Eating Disorder
731
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Eating Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
In contrast to Bulimia Nervosa, in which inappropriate compensatory mechanisms
are employed to counteract the effects of the binges, in binge-eating disorder no such
behavior is regularly employed to compensate for the binge eating. Overeating is
frequently seen during episodes of Major Depressive Disorder, but usually does not
involve binge eating. This appendix diagnosis should be considered only when the
individual reports that, during episodes of overeating, both the subjective sense of
impaired control and three of the associated symptoms listed in Criterion B are present.
Many individuals are distressed by episodes of overeating that are not binge-eating
episodes.
Research criteria for binge-eating disorder
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is
characterized by both of the following:
(1) eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period),
an amount of food that is definitely larger than most people would
eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances
(2) a sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a
feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how much
one is eating)
B. The binge-eating episodes are associated with three (or more) of the
following:
(1) eating much more rapidly than normal
(2) eating until feeling uncomfortably full
(3) eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry
(4) eating alone because of being embarrassed by how much one is
eating
(5) feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very guilty after
overeating
C. Marked distress regarding binge eating is present.
D. The binge eating occurs, on average, at least 2 days a week for 6 months.
Note: The method of determining frequency differs from that used for Bulimia
Nervosa; future research should address whether the preferred method of
setting a frequency threshold is counting the number of days on which binges
occur or counting the number of episodes of binge eating.
E. The binge eating is not associated with the regular use of inappropriate
compensatory behaviors (e.g., purging, fasting, excessive exercise) and
does not occur exclusively during the course of Anorexia Nervosa or
Bulimia Nervosa.732
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Depressive Personality Disorder
Features
The essential feature is a pervasive pattern of depressive cognitions and behaviors that
begins by early adulthood and that occurs in a variety of contexts. This pattern does not
occur exclusively during Major Depressive Episodes and is not better accounted for by
Dysthymic Disorder. The depressive cognitions and behaviors include a persistent and
pervasive feeling of dejection, gloominess, cheerlessness, joylessness, and unhappiness.
These individuals are overly serious, incapable of enjoyment or relaxation, and lack a
sense of humor. They may feel that they do not deserve to have fun or to be happy.
They also tend to brood and worry, dwelling persistently on their negative and unhappy
thoughts. Such individuals view the future as negatively as they view the present; they
doubt that things will ever improve, anticipate the worst, and while priding themselves
on being realistic, are considered by others to be pessimistic. They may be harsh in
self-judgment and prone to feeling excessively guilty for shortcomings and failings.
Self-esteem is low and particularly focused on feelings of inadequacy. Individuals with
this proposed disorder tend to judge others as harshly as they judge themselves. They
often focus on others' failings rather than their positive attributes, and they may be
negativistic, critical, and judgmental toward others.
Associated Features
These individuals may be quiet, introverted, passive, and unassertive, preferring to follow
others rather than taking the lead. This pattern may occur with approximately equal
frequency in females and males. Individuals with this presentation may be predisposed
to developing Dysthymic Disorder and possibly Major Depressive Disorder. These
conditions may exist on a spectrum, with depressive personality disorder being the
early-onset, persistent, traitlike variant of the Depressive Disorders. Preliminary evidence
suggests that depressive personality disorder may have an increased prevalence in family
members of probands with Major Depressive Disorder. Conversely, Major Depressive
Disorder may occur with increased frequency in family members of probands with
depressive personality disorder who do not themselves have Major Depressive Disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Personality Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
It remains controversial whether the distinction between depressive personality
disorder and Dysthymic Disorder is useful. The research criteria given for this
proposed disorder differ from the diagnostic criteria for Dysthymic Disorder by their
emphasis on cognitive, interpersonal, and intrapsychic personality traits. This proposed
disorder should not be considered if the symptoms are better accounted for by Dysthymic
Disorder or if they occur exclusively during Major Depressive Episodes. This proposed
disorder differs from so-called normal depressive traits (e.g., unhappiness, pessimism,
self-criticism, and proneness to guilt) in that the pattern is pervasive and causes marked
distress or impairment in social or occupational functioning. The relationship between
this proposed disorder and several other proposed categories included in this appendixPassive-Aggressive Personality Disorder
733
(i.e., minor depressive disorder, recurrent brief depressive disorder, and mixed anxiety-
depressive disorder) and with other Personality Disorders is not known, but substantial
overlap may exist among them.
Research criteria for depressive personality disorder
A. A pervasive pattern of depressive cognitions and behaviors beginning
by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by
five (or more) of the following:
(1) usual mood is dominated by dejection, gloominess, cheerlessness,
joylessness, unhappiness
(2) self-concept centers around beliefs of inadequacy, worthlessness,
and low self-esteem
(3) is critical, blaming, and derogatory toward self
(4) is brooding and given to worry
(5) is negativistic, critical, and judgmental toward others
(6) is pessimistic
(7) is prone to feeling guilty or remorseful
B. Does not occur exclusively during Major Depressive Episodes and is not
better accounted for by Dysthymic Disorder.
Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder
(Negativistic Personality Disorder)
Features
The essential feature is a pervasive pattern of negativistic attitudes and passive resistance
to demands for adequate performance in social and occupational situations that begins
by early adulthood and that occurs in a variety of contexts. This pattern does not occur
exclusively during Major Depressive Episodes and is not better accounted for by
Dysthymic Disorder. These individuals habitually resent, oppose, and resist demands to
function at a level expected by others. This opposition occurs most frequently in work
situations but can also be evident in social functioning. The resistance is expressed by
procrastination, forgetfulness, stubbornness, and intentional inefficiency, especially in
response to tasks assigned by authority figures. These individuals obstruct the efforts of
others by failing to do their share of the work. For example, when an executive gives
a subordinate some material to review for a meeting the next morning, the subordinate
may misplace or misfile the material rather than point out that there is insufficient time
to do the work. These individuals feel cheated, unappreciated, and misunderstood and
chronically complain to others. When difficulties appear, they blame their failures on
the behaviors of others. They may be sullen, irritable, impatient, argumentative, cynical,
skeptical, and contrary. Authority figures (e.g., a superior at work, a teacher at school,
a parent, or a spouse who acts the role of a parent) often become the focus of discontent.734
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Because of their negativism and tendency to externalize blame, these individuals often
criticize and voice hostility toward authority figures with minimal provocation. They are
also envious and resentful of peers who succeed or who are viewed positively by
authority figures. These individuals often complain about their personal misfortunes.
They have a negative view of the future and may make comments such as, "It doesn't
pay to be good" and "Good things don't last." These individuals may waver between
expressing hostile defiance toward those they view as causing their problems and
attempting to mollify these persons by asking forgiveness or promising to perform better
in the future.
Associated Features
These individuals are often overtly ambivalent, wavering indecisively from one course
of action to its opposite. They may follow an erratic path that causes endless wrangles
with others and disappointments for themselves. An intense conflict between depen-
dence on others and the desire for self-assertion is characteristic of these individuals.
Their self-confidence is often poor despite a superficial bravado. They foresee the worst
possible outcome for most situations, even those that are going well. This defeatist
outlook can evoke hostile and negative responses from others who are subjected to the
complaints of these individuals. This pattern of behavior often occurs in individuals with
Borderline, Histrionic, Paranoid, Dependent, Antisocial, and Avoidant Personality
Disorders.
Differential Diagnosis
In DSM-IV, individuals whose presentation meets these research criteria would be
diagnosed as having Personality Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
In Oppositional Defiant Disorder, there is a similar pattern of negativistic attitudes
and problems with authority figures, but Oppositional Defiant Disorder is usually
diagnosed in children, whereas this proposed disorder should be considered only in
adults. This pattern should not be considered if the symptoms are better accounted for
by Dysthymic Disorder or if they occur exclusively during Major Depressive
Episodes. Passive-aggressive behaviors are frequently encountered in everyday life,
particularly among those in authoritarian situations (e.g., work, military, prison) that do
not tolerate other forms of assertiveness. Only when these passive-aggressive personality
traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and cause significant functional impairment or subjec-
tive distress do they constitute a disorder.
Research criteria for passive-aggressive personality
disorder
A. A pervasive pattern of negativistic attitudes and passive resistance to
demands for adequate performance, beginning by early adulthood and
present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the
following:
(continued)Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
735
D Research criteria for passive-aggressive personality
disorder (continued)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
passively resists fulfilling routine social and occupational tasks
complains of being misunderstood and unappreciated by others
is sullen and argumentative
unreasonably criticizes and scorns authority
expresses envy and resentment toward those apparently more
fortunate
(6) voices exaggerated and persistent complaints of personal
misfortune
(7) alternates between hostile defiance and contrition
B. Does not occur exclusively during Major Depressive Episodes and is not
better accounted for by Dysthymic Disorder.
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
A consideration of Medication-Induced Movement Disorders is important in the man-
agement by medication of mental disorders or general medical conditions and in the
differential diagnosis with Axis I disorders (e.g., Anxiety Disorder versus Neuroleptic-
Induced Akathisia; catatonia versus Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome). These conditions
can lead to noncompliance with treatment and psychosocial and occupational im-
pairments. Medication-Induced Movement Disorders should be coded on Axis I.
Although these disorders are labeled "medication induced," it is often difficult to establish
the causal relationship between medication exposure and the development of the
movement disorder, especially because some of these conditions also occur in the
absence of medication exposure. Criteria and text are provided for these disorders to
facilitate research and to encourage appropriate diagnosis and treatment. The following
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders are included in this section: Neuroleptic-
Induced Parkinsonism, Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome, Neuroleptic-Induced Acute
Dystonia, Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia, Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskine-
sia, and Medication-Induced Postural Tremor. A category for Medication-Induced
Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified is also provided for medication-induced
movement disorders that do not meet the criteria for any of the specific disorders listed
above. These include movement disorders (e.g., parkinsonism, acute akathisia) that are
associated with a medication other than a neuroleptic (e.g., a serotonin reuptake
inhibitor).
The term neuroleptic is used broadly in this manual to refer to medications with
dopamine-antagonist properties. These include so-called typical antipsychotic agents
(e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol, fluphenazine), atypical antipsychotic agents (e.g.,
clozapine), certain dopamine receptor blocking drugs used in the treatment of physical
symptoms such as nausea (e.g., prochlorperazine, promethazine, trimethobenzamide,
metoclopramide), and amoxapine, which is marketed as an antidepressant.736
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
332.1 Neuroleptic-lnduced Parkinsonism
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Neuroleptic-lnduced Parkinsonism is the presence of parkinso-
nian signs or symptoms (i.e., tremor, muscular rigidity, or akinesia) that develop in
association with the use of neuroleptic medication. These symptoms usually develop
within a few weeks of starting or raising the dose of a neuroleptic medication or after
reducing a medication (e.g., an anticholinergic medication) that is being used to treat
or prevent acute extra pyramidal symptoms. The symptoms must not be better accounted
for by a mental disorder (e.g., catatonia, negative symptoms of Schizophrenia, psycho-
motor retardation in a Major Depressive Episode) and are not due to a neurological or
other general medical condition (e.g., idiopathic Parkinson's disease, Wilson's disease).
Rigidity and akinesia are most frequent, whereas tremor is somewhat less common. It
has been estimated that at least 50% of outpatients receiving long-term neuroleptic
treatment develop some parkinsonian signs or symptoms at some point in their course
of treatment. Symptoms may develop rapidly after starting or raising the dose of
neuroleptic medication or may develop insidiously over time. The most typical course
is the development of symptoms 2-4 weeks after starting a neuroleptic medication. The
symptoms then tend to continue unchanged or to diminish gradually over the next few
months. Symptoms will usually abate with a reduction of the dose (or discontinuation)
of the neuroleptic medication, the addition of antiparkinsonian medication, or a switch
to a neuroleptic medication with a lower incidence of these side effects.
Parkinsonian tremor is a steady, rhythmic oscillatory movement (3-6 cycles per
second) that is typically slower than other tremors and is apparent at rest. It may occur
intermittently and be unilateral or bilateral or depend on where the limb is located
(positional tremor). The tremor may affect limbs, head, jaw, mouth, lip ("rabbit
syndrome"), or tongue. The tremor can be suppressed, especially when the individual
attempts to perform a task with the tremulous limb. Individuals may describe the tremor
as "shaking" and report that it occurs especially during times of anxiety, stress, or fatigue.
Parkinsonian muscular rigidity is defined as excessive firmness and tensing of
resting muscles. It may affect all skeletal muscles or it may only involve discrete muscular
areas. Two kinds of rigidity occur: continuous ("lead-pipe") rigidity and cogwheel
rigidity. In lead-pipe rigidity, the limb or joint resists movement and feels locked in
place. The rigidity is continuous (i.e., the limb usually does not show moment-to-moment
fluctuations). In cogwheel rigidity, as the muscle is stretched around a joint there is a
rhythmic, ratchet-like resistance that interrupts the usual smooth motion of the joint.
Cogwheel rigidity can be felt by placing the hand over the joint being moved. Cogwheel
rigidity occurs when the muscles are passively moved, is most common in the wrists
and elbows, and often waxes and wanes. Individuals with parkinsonian rigidity may
complain of generalized muscle tenderness or stiffness, muscle or joint pain, body
aching, or lack of coordination during sports.
Akinesia is a state of decreased spontaneous motor activity. There is global slowing
as well as slowness in initiating and executing movements. Normal everyday behaviors
(e.g., grooming) are reduced. Individuals may complain of feeling listless, lacking
spontaneity and drive, or oversleeping. Parkinsonian rigidity and akinesia can be
manifested as abnormalities in gait or decreases in length of stride, arm swing, or overall
spontaneity of walking. Other signs include bent-over neck, stooped shoulders, a staring
facial expression, and small shuffling steps. Drooling may arise due to a general decrease332.1 Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism
737
in pharyngeal motor activity, although it may be less common in parkinsonism associated
with neuroleptic medication because of the anticholinergic properties of these medications.
Associated Features
Associated behavioral symptoms may include depression and worsening of negative
signs of Schizophrenia. Other associated signs and symptoms include small handwriting
(micrographia), hypophonia, postural instability, inhibited blinking in response to
glabellae tapping, and seborrhea. General medical complications can occur when
parkinsonian symptoms are severe and result in decreased motor activity (e.g., contrac-
tures, bedsores, and pulmonary emboli). Decreased gag reflex and dysphagia can be
life threatening and may present as aspiration pneumonia or unexplained weight loss.
There may be urinary incontinence and increased rates of hip fractures in elderly persons.
Risk factors for developing Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism include a history of prior
episodes of Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism; older age; the presence of a coexisting
delirium, dementia, or amnestic disorder; or a coexisting neurological condition.
Children may also be at higher risk of developing Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism.
Furthermore, the risk of developing Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism is associated with
the type of neuroleptic medication, the rapidity of increases in dosage, and the absolute
dose; the risk is reduced if individuals are taking anticholinergic medications.
Differential
Diagnosis
It is important to distinguish between Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism and other
causes of parkinsonian symptoms in individuals being treated with a neuroleptic
medication. Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism should be distinguished from parkin-
sonian symptoms due to another substance or medication or due to a neurolog-
ical or other general medical condition (e.g., Parkinson's disease, Wilson's disease).
Laboratory findings may help to establish other causes for the parkinsonian symptoms
(e.g., positive urine heavy metal screen, basal ganglia calcification indicating hypercal-
cemia, serum ceruloplasmin indicating Wilson's disease). Tremor due to other causes of
parkinsonian symptoms, familial tremor, non-neuroleptic-induced tremor, and tremor
associated with Substance Withdrawal should be distinguished from tremor in Neuro-
leptic-Induced Parkinsonism. Nonparkinsonian tremors tend to be finer (e.g., smaller
amplitude) and faster (10 cycles per second) and tend to worsen on intention (e.g.,
when the individual reaches out to hold a cup). Tremor associated with Substance
Withdrawal will usually have associated hyperreflexia and increased autonomic signs.
Tremor from cerebellar disease worsens on intention and may have associated
nystagmus, ataxia, or scanning speech. Choreiform movements associated with Neuro-
leptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia can resemble parkinsonian tremor; however, the
parkinsonian tremor is distinguished by its steady rhythmicity. Strokes and other focal
lesions of the central nervous system can cause focal neurological signs as well as
causing immobility from flaccid or spastic paralysis. In contrast, muscle strength is initially
normal and muscles fatigue later in Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism. Rigidity from
parkinsonism also needs to be differentiated from the "clasp knife" phenomenon found
in pyramidal lesions and oppositional behavior.
Some indications that the parkinsonian symptoms are not due to neuroleptics
include family history of an inherited neurological condition, rapidly progressive738
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
parkinsonism not accounted for by recent psychopharmacological changes, the presence
of focal nonextrapyramidal neurological signs (e.g., frontal release signs, cranial nerve
abnormalities, or a positive Babinski sign), and parkinsonian signs or symptoms that do
not reverse within 3 months of neuroleptic discontinuation (or 1 year when the
neuroleptic was given in a long-acting intramuscular form). Individuals with Neurolep-
tic Malignant Syndrome have both severe akinesia and rigidity but have additional
physical and laboratory findings (e.g., fever, increased creatine phosphokinase [CPK]).
Distinguishing between symptoms of a primary mental disorder and behavioral
disturbances from Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism can be difficult. Often the diagno-
sis has to be based on multiple sources of information (e.g., physical examination
findings, medication history, mental symptoms). The diagnosis of Neuroleptic-Induced
Parkinsonism may have to be made provisionally and can sometimes only be confirmed
by a trial of dosage reduction (or elimination) of the neuroleptic medication or by
initiating anticholinergic treatment. Neuroleptic-induced akinesia and Major Depres-
sive Disorder have many overlapping symptoms. Major Depressive Disorder is more
likely to have vegetative signs (e.g., early morning awakening), hopelessness, and
despair, whereas apathy is more typical of akinesia. Catatonia associated with Schizo-
phrenia, Catatonic Type, or Mood Disorders With Catatonic Features can be
particularly difficult to distinguish from severe akinesia. The negative symptoms of
Schizophrenia may also be difficult to differentiate from akinesia. Rigidity may also be
associated with Psychotic Disorders, delirium, dementia, Anxiety Disorders, and
Conversion Disorder. The resistance to passive motion is constant through the full
range of motion in parkinsonian rigidity, whereas it is inconsistent in mental disorders
or other neurological conditions presenting with rigidity. Furthermore, individuals with
parkinsonian rigidity generally have a constellation of signs and symptoms, including a
characteristic walk and facial expression, drooling, decreased blinking, and other aspects
of bradykinesia.
Research criteria for 332.1 Neuroleptic-Induced
Parkinsonism
A. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms has developed in
association with the use of neuroleptic medication:
(1) parkinsonian tremor (i.e., a coarse, rhythmic, resting tremor with
a frequency between 3 and 6 cycles per second, affecting the limbs,
head, mouth, or tongue)
(2) parkinsonian muscular rigidity (i.e., cogwheel rigidity or continu-
ous "lead-pipe" rigidity)
(3) akinesia (i.e., a decrease in spontaneous facial expressions, ges-
tures, speech, or body movements)
B. The symptoms in Criterion A developed within a few weeks of starting
or raising the dose of a neuroleptic medication, or of reducing a
medication used to treat (or prevent) acute extrapyramidal symptoms
(e.g., anticholinergic agents).
(continued)333-92 Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
739
D Research criteria for 332.1 Neuroleptic-Induced
Parkinsonism (continued)
C. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better accounted for by a mental
disorder (e.g., catatonic or negative symptoms in Schizophrenia, psy-
chomotor retardation in a Major Depressive Episode). Evidence that the
symptoms are better accounted for by a mental disorder might include
the following: the symptoms precede the exposure to neuroleptic
medication or are not compatible with the pattern of pharmacological
intervention (e.g., no improvement after lowering the neuroleptic dose
or administering anticholinergic medication).
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not due to a nonneuroleptic substance
or to a neurological or other general medical condition (e.g., Parkinson's
disease, Wilson's disease). Evidence that the symptoms are due to a
general medical condition might include the following: the symptoms
precede exposure to neuroleptic medication, unexplained focal neuro-
logical signs are present, or the symptoms progress despite a stable
medication regimen.
333.92 Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome is the development of severe
muscle rigidity and elevated temperature in an individual using neuroleptic medication.
This is accompanied by two (or more) of the following symptoms: diaphoresis,
dysphagia, tremor, incontinence, changes in level of consciousness ranging from
confusion to coma, mutism, tachycardia, elevated or labile blood pressure, leukocytosis,
and laboratory evidence of muscle injury (e.g., elevated creatine phosphokinase [CPK]).
These symptoms are not due to another substance (e.g., phencyclidine) or to a
neurological or other general medical condition (e.g., viral encephalitis) and are not
better accounted for by a mental disorder (e.g., Mood Disorder With Catatonic Features).
There may be accompanying agitation or acute dystonic reactions.
Elevated temperature ranges from mild elevations (e.g., 99°-100°F) to markedly
hyperthermic states (e.g., 106"F). Fever due to a general medical condition (e.g.,
infection) needs to be ruled out as a cause of the elevated temperature; however,
individuals with Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome often develop other medical condi-
tions that can worsen an already elevated temperature. CPK is typically elevated, ranging
from minor elevations to extremely high levels (exceeding 16,000 IU). It should be noted
that mild to moderate elevations of CPK can also be seen with muscle damage due to
various causes such as intramuscular injection and use of restraints and has also been
reported in individuals with acute Psychotic Disorders. White blood cell counts are often
high, usually ranging between 10,000 and 20,000. In severe cases, myoglobinuria may
occur and may be a harbinger of renal failure.740
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
The presentation and course of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome are quite variable.
It may have a malignant, potentially fatal course or a relatively benign, self-limited course
There is currently no way to predict the evolution of the syndrome in any particular
individual. Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome usually develops within 4 weeks after
starting a neuroleptic medication, with two-thirds of cases developing within the first
week. However, some individuals develop Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome after taking
the same dose of neuroleptic medication for many months. After discontinuation of
neuroleptic medication, resolution of the condition occurs within a mean duration of
2 weeks for nondepot neuroleptic medication and 1 month for depot neuroleptic
medication, although there are cases that continue far beyond the mean duration of
2 weeks. In most cases, there is eventually a total resolution of symptoms. For a minority
of individuals, the outcome is fatal. Fatality rates in the literature are in the 10%-20%
range, but these rates may be artificially high as a result of reporting bias. With increasing
recognition of this condition, estimates of fatality rates have decreased. There have been
rare reports of neurological sequelae.
Associated Features
Most cases have been reported to occur in individuals with Schizophrenia, Manic
Episodes, and Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition (e.g., a delirium or
a dementia). Prior episodes of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome, agitation, dehydration,
high doses of neuroleptic medication, rapid increase in dosage, and intramuscular
injection of neuroleptic medication appear to be risk factors. There is controversy in the
literature about whether treatment with lithium carbonate enhances the likelihood of
developing Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome. Although this disorder can occur in both
hot and cold environments, environments that are warm and humid may contribute to
the development of this condition. Various general medical conditions may occur and
complicate the clinical picture, including pneumonia, renal failure, cardiac or respiratory
arrest, seizures, sepsis, pulmonary embolism, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Estimates of the prevalence of this condition in individuals exposed to neuroleptic
medications range from 0.07% to 1.4%. Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome has bee
reported to occur somewhat more frequently in males than in females. The condition
may occur at any age but has been reported most frequently in young adults. Variations
in reported prevalence may be due to a lack of consistency in the definition of caseness,
neuroleptic prescribing practices, study design, and the demographics of the population
being studied. Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome may occur more frequently with
high-potency neuroleptic medication. Some individuals who have developed this
condition may be less likely to be compliant with taking neuroleptic medication.
Although many individuals do not experience a recurrence when neuroleptic medication
is reinstituted, some do experience a recurrence, especially when the neuroleptic
medication is reinstituted soon after an episode of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome.
Differential Diagnosis
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome must be distinguished from the symptoms of a
neurological or other general medical condition. An elevated temperature that is
due to a general medical condition (e.g., a viral infection) must be distinguished from
the elevated temperature associated with Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome. Extremely333.92 Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
741
elevated temperatures are more likely due to Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome, especially
in the absence of an identifiable general medical condition. In addition, in Neuroleptic
Malignant Syndrome, other characteristic features (e.g., severe muscle rigidity) are also
present. General medical conditions with a presentation that may resemble Neuroleptic
Malignant Syndrome include central nervous system infection, status epilepticus, sub-
cortical brain lesions (e.g., stroke, trauma, neoplasms), and systemic conditions (e.g.,
intermittent acute porphyria, tetanus). Heat stroke may mimic Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome but can be distinguished by the presence of hot, dry skin (rather than
diaphoresis), hypotension (rather than fluctuating or elevated blood pressure), and limb
flaccidity (rather than rigidity). Malignant hyperthermia presents with high elevated
temperature and rigidity and usually occurs in genetically susceptible individuals who
have received halogenated inhalational anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants.
Malignant hyperthermia usually starts within minutes of receiving anesthesia. Because
other general medical conditions can co-occur with or result from Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome, it is important to determine whether the elevated temperature occurred before
or subsequent to the superimposed medical problems. Abrupt discontinuation of
antiparkinsonian medication in a person with Parkinson's disease or treatment with
dopamine-depletingagents (e.g., reserpine, tetrabenazine) may precipitate a reaction
similar to Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome must be distinguished from similar syndromes
resulting from the use of other psychotropic medications (e.g., monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, monoamine oxidase inhibitor-tricyclic combinations, monoamine oxidase
inhibitor-serotonergic agent combinations, monoamine oxidase inhibitor-meperidine
combinations, lithium toxicity, anticholinergic delirium, amphetamines, fenfluramine,
cocaine, and phencyclidine), all of which may present with hyperthermia, altered mental
status, and autonomic changes. In such cases, a diagnosis of Medication-Induced
Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified can be given.
Individuals with Schizophrenia or a Manic Episode who are not receiving a
neuroleptic medication may sometimes present with extreme catatonic states (so-called
lethal catatonia), which can mimic Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome and may include
elevated temperature, autonomic dysfunction, and abnormal laboratory findings. For
individuals already receiving a neuroleptic medication, a history of prior extreme
catatonic states when the individual was not receiving a neuroleptic is important in
making the differential diagnosis. The problem is further confounded by the fact that
neuroleptic medication may worsen the symptoms of lethal catatonia.
Research criteria for 333.92 Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome
A. The development of severe muscle rigidity and elevated temperature
associated with the use of neuroleptic medication.
B. Two (or more) of the following:
(1) diaphoresis
(2) dysphagia
(continued)742
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
D Research criteria for 333.92 Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome (continued)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
tremor
incontinence
changes in level of consciousness ranging from confusion to coma
mutism
tachycardia
elevated or labile blood pressure
leucocytosis
laboratory evidence of muscle injury (e.g., elevated CPK)
C. The symptoms in Criteria A and B are not due to another substance
(e.g., phencyclidine) or a neurological or other general medical condi-
tion (e.g., viral encephalitis).
D. The symptoms in Criteria A and B are not better accounted for by a
mental disorder (e.g., Mood Disorder With Catatonic Features).
333.7 Neuroleptiolnduced Acute Dystonia
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia is sustained abnormal
postures or muscle spasms that develop in association with the use of neuroleptic
medication. These include abnormal positioning of the head and neck in relation to the
body (e.g., retrocollis, torticollis); spasms of the jaw muscles (trismus, gaping, grimacing);
impaired swallowing (dysphagia), speaking, or breathing (potentially life-threatening
laryngeal-pharyngeal spasm, dysphonia); thickened or slurred speech due to hypertonic
tongue (dysarthria, macroglossia); tongue protrusion or tongue dysfunction; eyes
deviated up, down, or sideward (oculogyric crisis); or abnormal positioning of the distal
limbs or trunk (opisthotonos). There is great variability in the severity of the symptoms
and in the body areas that may be affected. Increased tone in the affected muscles is
usually present. The signs or symptoms develop within 7 days of starting or rapidly
raising the dose of neuroleptic medication or of reducing a medication being used to
treat or prevent acute extrapyramidal symptoms (e.g., anticholinergic agents). The
symptoms must not be better accounted for by a mental disorder (e.g., catatonic
symptoms in Schizophrenia) and must not be due to a nonneuroleptic substance or to
a neurological or other general medical condition.
Associated Features
Fear and anxiety often accompany the onset of Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia,
especially in individuals who are unaware of the possibility of developing dystonia and
who mistakenly regard the symptom as part of their mental disorder. Some individuals
experience pain or cramps in affected muscles. Noncompliance with medication333.7 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia
743
treatment may result following the development of acute dystonic reactions. Neurolep-
tic-Induced Acute Dystonia occurs most commonly in young males. Risk factors for
developing Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia include prior dystonic reactions to
neuroleptic treatment and the use of high-potency neuroleptic medication.
Differential Diagnosis
It is important to distinguish between Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia and other
causes of dystonia in individuals being treated with a neuroleptic medication. Evidence
that the symptoms are due to a neurological or other general medical condition
includes course (e.g., symptoms preceding exposure to the neuroleptic medication or
progression of symptoms in the absence of change in medication) and the presence of
focal neurological signs. Spontaneously occurring focal or segmental dystonias
usually persist for several days or weeks independent of medication. Other neurological
conditions (e.g., temporal lobe seizures, viral and bacterial infections, trauma, or
space-occupying lesions in the peripheral or central nervous system) and endocrinopath-
ies (e.g., hypoparathyroidism) can also produce symptoms (e.g., tetany) that resemble
a Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome can produce dystonia but differs in that it is
also accompanied by fever and generalized rigidity. Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia
should be distinguished from dystonia due to a nonneuroleptic medication (e.g.,
anticonvulsant medications such as phenytoin and carbamazepine). In such cases, a
diagnosis of Medication-Induced Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified can
be given.
Catatonia associated with a Mood Disorder or Schizophrenia can be distin-
guished by the temporal relationship between the symptoms and the neuroleptic
exposure (e.g., dystonia preceding exposure to neuroleptic medication) and response
to pharmacological intervention (e.g., no improvement after lowering of neuroleptic
dose or anticholinergic administration). Furthermore, individuals with Neuroleptic-
Induced Acute Dystonia are generally distressed about the dystonic reaction and usually
seek intervention. In contrast, individuals with catatonia are typically mute and with-
drawn and do not express subjective distress about their condition.
Research criteria for 333.7 Neuroleptic-Induced
Acute Dystonia
A. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms has developed in
association with the use of neuroleptic medication:
(1) abnormal positioning of the head and neck in relation to the body
(e.g., retrocollis, torticollis)
(2) spasms of the jaw muscles (trismus, gaping, grimacing)
(3) impaired swallowing (dysphagia), speaking, or breathing
(laryngeal-pharyngeal spasm, dysphonia)
(continued)744
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
D Research criteria for 333.7 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute
Dystonia (continued)
(4) thickened or slurred speech due to hypertonic or enlarged tongue
(dysarthria, macroglossia)
(5) tongue protrusion or tongue dysfunction
(6) eyes deviated up, down, or sideward (oculogyric crisis)
(7) abnormal positioning of the distal limbs or trunk
B. The signs or symptoms in Criterion A developed within 7 days of starting
or rapidly raising the dose of neuroleptic medication, or of reducing a
medication used to treat (or prevent) acute extrapyramidal symptoms
(e.g., anticholinergic agents).
C. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better accounted for by a mental
disorder (e.g., catatonic symptoms in Schizophrenia). Evidence that the
symptoms are better accounted for by a mental disorder might include
the following: the symptoms precede the exposure to neuroleptic
medication or are not compatible with the pattern of pharmacological
intervention (e.g., no improvement after neuroleptic lowering or anti-
cholinergic administration).
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not due to a nonneuroleptic substance
or to a neurological or other general medical condition. Evidence that
the symptoms are due to a general medical condition might include the
following: the symptoms precede the exposure to the neuroleptic
medication, unexplained focal neurological signs are present, or the
symptoms progress in the absence of change in medication.
333.99 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia are subjective complaints
of restlessness and at least one of the following observed movements: fidgety movements
or swinging of the legs while seated, rocking from foot to foot or "walking on the spot"
while standing, pacing to relieve the restlessness, or an inability to sit or stand still for
at least several minutes. In its most severe form, the individual may be unable to maintain
any position for more than a few seconds. The subjective complaints include a sense of
inner restlessness, most often in the legs; a compulsion to move one's legs; distress if
one is asked not to move one's legs; and dysphoria and anxiety. The symptoms typically
occur within 4 weeks of initiating or increasing the dose of a neuroleptic medication
and can occasionally follow the reduction of medication used to treat or prevent acute
extrapyramidal symptoms (e.g., anticholinergic agents). The symptoms are not better
accounted for by a mental disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia, Substance Withdrawal, agitation
from a Major Depressive or Manic Episode, hyperactivity in Attention-Deficit/Hyperac-333.99 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia
745
tivity Disorder) and are not due to a nonneuroleptic substance or to a neurological or
other general medical condition (e.g., Parkinson's disease, iron-deficiency anemi).
Associated Features and Disorders
The subjective distress resulting from akathisia is significant and can lead to noncom-
pliance with neuroleptic treatment. Akathisia may be associated with dysphoria,
irritability, aggression, or suicide attempts. Worsening of psychotic symptoms or
behavioral dyscontrol may lead to an increase in neuroleptic medication dose, which
may exacerbate the problem. Akathisia can develop very rapidly after initiating or
increasing neuroleptic medication. The development of akathisia appears to be dose
dependent and to be more frequently associated with particular neuroleptic medications.
Acute akathisia tends to persist for as long as neuroleptic medications are continued,
although the intensity may fluctuate over time. The reported prevalence of akathisia
among individuals receiving neuroleptic medication has varied widely (20%-75%).
Variations in reported prevalence may be due to a lack of consistency in the definition
of caseness, neuroleptic prescribing practices, study design, and the demographics of
the population being studied.
Differential Diagnosis
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia may be clinically indistinguishable from syndromes
of restlessness due to certain neurological or other general medical conditions, to
nonneuroleptic substances, and to agitation presenting as part of a mental disorder (e.g.,
a Manic Episode). The akathisia of Parkinson's disease and iron-deficiency anemia
are phenomenologically similar to Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia. The frequently
abrupt appearance of restlessness soon after initiation or increase in neuroleptic
medication usually distinguishes Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia.
Serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitor antidepressant medications may pro-
duce akathisia that appears to be identical in phenomenology and treatment response
to Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia. Akathisia due to nonneuroleptic medication can
be diagnosed as Medication-Induced Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.
Other situations that might be included under Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
Not Otherwise Specified are acute akathisia with only subjective or only objective
complaints, but not both; and akathisia occurring late in the course of treatment (e.g.,
6 months after initiation of, or increase in the dose of, a neuroleptic). Neuroleptic-
Induced Tardive Dyskinesia also often has a component of generalized restlessness
that may coexist with akathisia in an individual receiving neuroleptic medication.
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia is differentiated from Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive
Dyskinesia by the nature of the movements and their relationship to the initiation of
medication. The time course of symptomatic presentation relative to neuroleptic dose
changes may aid in this distinction. An increase in neuroleptic medication will often
exacerbate akathisia, whereas it often temporarily relieves the symptoms of Tardive
Dyskinesia.
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia should be distinguished from symptoms that
are better accounted for by a mental disorder. Individuals with Depressive Episodes,
Manic Episodes, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Schizophrenia and other Psy-
chotic Disorders, Attention-Deficit/HyperactivityDisorder, dementia, delirium,746
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Substance Intoxication (e.g., with cocaine), or Substance Withdrawal (e.g., from an
opioid) may also display agitation that is difficult to distinguish from akathisia. Some of
these individuals are able to differentiate akathisia from the anxiety, restlessness, and
agitation characteristic of a mental disorder by their experience of akathisia as being
different from previously experienced feelings. Other evidence that restlessness or
agitation may be better accounted for by a mental disorder includes the onset of agitation
prior to exposure to the neuroleptic medication, absence of increasing restlessness with
increasing neuroleptic medication doses, and absence of relief with pharmacological
interventions (e.g., no improvement after decreasing the neuroleptic dose or treatment
with medication intended to treat the akathisia).
Research criteria for 333.99 Neuroleptic-Induced
Acute Akathisia
A. The development of subjective complaints of restlessness after exposure
to a neuroleptic medication.
B. At least one of the following is observed:
(1) fidgety movements or swinging of the legs
(2) rocking from foot to foot while standing
(3) pacing to relieve restlessness
(4) inability to sit or stand still for at least several minutes
C. The onset of the symptoms in Criteria A and B occurs within 4 weeks
of initiating or increasing the dose of the neuroleptic, or of reducing
medication used to treat (or prevent) acute extrapyramidal symptoms
(e.g., anticholinergic agents).
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better accounted for by a mental
disorder (e.g., Schizophrenia, Substance Withdrawal, agitation from a
Major Depressive or Manic Episode, hyperactivity in Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder). Evidence that symptoms may be better ac-
counted for by a mental disorder might include the following: the onset
of symptoms preceding the exposure to the neuroleptics, the absence
of increasing restlessness with increasing neuroleptic doses, and the
absence of relief with pharmacological interventions (e.g., no improve-
ment after decreasing the neuroleptic dose or treatment with medication
intended to treat the akathisia).
E. The symptoms in Criterion A are not due to a nonneuroleptic substance
or to a neurological or other general medical condition. Evidence that
symptoms are due to a general medical condition might include the
onset of the symptoms preceding the exposure to neuroleptics or the
progression of symptoms in the absence of a change in medication.333.82 Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia
747
333.82 Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia are abnormal, invol-
untary movements of the tongue, jaw, trunk, or extremities that develop in association
with the use of neuroleptic medication. The movements are present over a period of at
least 4 weeks and may be choreiform (rapid, jerky, nonrepetitive), athetoid (slow,
sinuous, continual), or rhythmic (e.g., stereotypies) in nature. The signs or symptoms
develop during exposure to a neuroleptic medication or within 4 weeks of withdrawal
from an oral (or within 8 weeks of withdrawal from a depot) neuroleptic medication.
There must be a history of the use of neuroleptic medication for at least 3 months (or
1 month in individuals age 60 years or older). Although a large number of epidemio-
logical studies have established the etiological relationship between neuroleptic use and
Tardive Dyskinesia, any dyskinesia in an individual who is receiving neuroleptic
medication is not necessarily Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia. The movements
must not be due to a neurological or other general medical condition (e.g., Huntington's
disease, Sydenham's chorea, spontaneous dyskinesia, hyperthyroidism, Wilson's dis-
ease), to ill-fitting dentures, or to exposure to other medications that can cause acute
reversible dyskinesia (e.g., L-dopa, bromocriptine). The movements should also not be
better accounted for by a neuroleptic-induced acute movement disorder (e.g., Neuro-
leptic-Induced Acute Dystonia, Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia).
Over three-fourths of the individuals with Tardive Dyskinesia have abnormal
orofacial movements, approximately one-half have limb involvement, and up to
one-quarter have axial dyskinesia of the trunk. All three regions are affected in
approximately 10% of individuals. Involvement of other muscle groups (e.g., pharyngeal,
abdominal) may occur but is uncommon, especially in the absence of dyskinesia of the
orofacial region, limbs, or trunk. Limb or truncal dyskinesia without orofacial involve-
ment is more common in younger individuals, whereas orofacial dyskinesias are typical
in elderly persons.
Associated Features
The symptoms of Tardive Dyskinesia tend to be worsened by stimulants, neuroleptic
withdrawal, and anticholinergic medications and may be transiently worsened by
emotional arousal, stress, and distraction during voluntary movements in unaffected
parts of the body. The abnormal movements of dyskinesia are transiently reduced by
relaxation and by voluntary movements in affected parts of the body. They are generally
absent during sleep. Dyskinesia may be suppressed, at least temporarily, by increased
doses of neuroleptics or sedatives.
The overall prevalence of Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia in individuals
who have received long-term neuroleptic treatment ranges from 20% to 30%. The overall
incidence among younger individuals ranges from 3% to 5% per year. Elderly individuals
appear to develop Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia more often, with prevalence
figures reported up to 50% and an incidence of 25%-30% after an average of 1 year's
cumulative exposure to neuroleptic medication. Prevalence also varies depending on
setting, with Tardive Dyskinesia tending to be more common among inpatients
(especially chronically institutionalized individuals). Tardive Dyskinesia is diagnosed
with approximately equal frequency in young males and females, whereas among elderly748
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
individuals it may be seen more often in females than in males. Mood Disorders
(especially Major Depressive Disorder), neurological conditions, greater cumulative
amount of neuroleptic medication, and early development of extrapyramidal side effects
have been suggested as risk factors for Tardive Dyskinesia. Variations in reported
prevalence may be due to a lack of consistency in the definition of caseness, neuroleptic
prescribing practices, study design, and the demographics of the population being
studied.
Onset may occur at any age and is almost always insidious. The signs are typically
minimal to mild at onset and escape notice except by a keen observer. In a majority of
cases, Tardive Dyskinesia is mild and is primarily a cosmetic problem. In severe cases,
however, it may be associated with general medical complications (e.g., ulcers in cheeks
and tongue; loss of teeth; macroglossia; difficulty in walking, swallowing, or breathing;
muffled speech; weight loss; depression; and suicidal ideation). If the individual with
Tardive Dyskinesia remains off neuroleptic medication, the dyskinesia remits within
3 months in one-third of the cases and remits by 12-18 months in more than 50% of
cases, although these percentages are lower in elderly persons. When individuals
receiving neuroleptic medication are assessed periodically, Tardive Dyskinesia is found
to be stable over time in about one-half, to worsen in one-quarter, and to improve in
the rest. Younger individuals generally tend to improve more readily; in elderly persons
there is a greater likelihood that Tardive Dyskinesia may become more severe or more
generalized with continued neuroleptic use. When neuroleptic medications are discon-
tinued, it is estimated that 5%-40% of all cases remit and between 50% and 90% of mild
cases remit.
Differential Diagnosis
Dyskinesia that emerges during neuroleptic withdrawal may remit with continued
withdrawal from neuroleptic medication. If the dyskinesia persists for at least 4 weeks,
a diagnosis of Tardive Dyskinesia may be warranted. Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive
Dyskinesia must be distinguished from other causes of orofacial and body dyskinesia.
These conditions include Huntington's disease; Wilson's disease; Sydenham's
(rheumatic) chorea; systemic lupus erythematosus; thyrotoxicosis; heavy metal
poisoning; ill-fitting dentures; dyskinesia due to other medications such as
L-dopa, bromocriptine, or amantadine; and spontaneous dyskinesias. Factors that
may be helpful in making the distinction are evidence that the symptoms preceded the
exposure to the neuroleptic medication or that other focal neurological signs are present.
It should be noted that other movement disorders may coexist with Neuroleptic-Induced
Tardive Dyskinesia. Because spontaneous dyskinesia can occur in more than 5% of
individuals and is also more common in elderly persons, it may be difficult to prove that
neuroleptic medications produced Tardive Dyskinesia in a given individual. Neurolep-
tic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia must be distinguished from symptoms that are due to a
neuroleptic-induced acute movement disorder (e.g., Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dys-
tonia or Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia). Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia
develops within 7 days and Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia develops within
4 weeks of initiating or increasing the dose of a neuroleptic medication (or reducing the
dose of a medication used to treat acute extrapyramidal symptoms). Neuroleptic-Induced
Tardive Dyskinesia, on the other hand, develops during exposure to (or withdrawal
from) neuroleptic medication in individuals with a history of neuroleptic use for at least
3 months (or 1 month in elderly persons).333.1 Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
749
Research criteria for 333.82 Neuroleptic-Induced
Tardive Dyskinesia
A. Involuntary movements of the tongue, jaw, trunk, or extremities have
developed in association with the use of neuroleptic medication.
B. The involuntary movements are present over a period of at least 4 weeks
and occur in any of the following patterns:
(1) choreiform movements (i.e., rapid, jerky, nonrepetitive)
(2) athetoid movements (i.e., slow, sinuous, continual)
(3) rhythmic movements (i.e., stereotypies)
C. The signs or symptoms in Criteria A and B develop during exposure to
a neuroleptic medication or within 4 weeks of withdrawal from an oral
(or within 8 weeks of withdrawal from a depot) neuroleptic medication.
D. There has been exposure to neuroleptic medication for at least 3 months
(1 month if age 60 years or older).
E. The symptoms are not due to a neurological or general medical
condition (e.g., Huntington's disease, Sydenham's chorea, spontaneous
dyskinesia, hyperthyroidism, Wilson's disease), ill-fitting dentures, or
exposure to other medications that cause acute reversible dyskinesia
(e.g., L-dopa, bromocriptine). Evidence that the symptoms are due to
one of these etiologies might include the following: the symptoms
precede the exposure to the neuroleptic medication or unexplained
focal neurological signs are present.
F. The symptoms are not better accounted for by a neuroleptic-induced
acute movement disorder (e.g., Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia,
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia).
333.1 Medication-Induced
Postural Tremor
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of Medication-Induced Postural Tremor is a fine postural tremor
that has developed in association with the use of a medication. Medications with which
such a tremor may be associated include lithium, beta-adrenergic medications (e.g.,
isoproterenol), stimulants (e.g., amphetamine), dopaminergic medications, anticonvul-
sant medications (e.g., valproic acid), neuroleptic medications, antidepressant medica-
tions, and methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine, theophylline). The tremor is a regular,
rhythmic oscillation of the limbs (most commonly hands and fingers), head, mouth, or
tongue with a frequency of between 8 and 12 cycles per second. It is most easily observed750
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
when the affected body part is held in a sustained posture (e.g., hands outstretched,
mouth held open). When an individual describes a tremor that is consistent with this
definition, but the clinician does not directly observe the tremor, it may be helpful to
try to re-create the situation in which the tremor occurred (e.g., drinking from a cup and
saucer). The symptoms are not due to a preexisting, nonpharmacologically induced
tremor and are not better accounted for by Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism.
Associated Features
Most available information concerns lithium-induced tremor. Lithium tremor is a
common, usually benign, and well-tolerated side effect of therapeutic doses. However,
it may cause social embarrassment, occupational difficulties, and noncompliance in some
individuals. As serum lithium levels approach toxic levels, the tremor may become more
coarse and be accompanied by muscle twitching, fasciculations, or ataxia. Nontoxic
lithium tremor may improve spontaneously over time. A variety of factors may increase
the risk of lithium tremor (e.g., increasing age, high serum lithium levels, concurrent
antidepressant or neuroleptic medication, excessive caffeine intake, personal or family
history of tremor, presence of Alcohol Dependence, and associated anxiety). The
frequency of complaints about tremor appears to decrease with duration of lithium
treatment. Factors that may exacerbate the tremor include anxiety, stress, fatigue,
hypoglycemia, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma, hypothermia, and Alcohol With-
drawal.
Differential
Diagnosis
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor should be distinguished from a preexisting
tremor that is not caused by the effects of a medication. Factors that help to establish
that the tremor was preexisting include its temporal relationship to the initiation of
medication, lack of correlation with serum levels of the medication, and persistence after
the medication is discontinued. If a preexisting, nonpharmacologically induced tremor
is present that worsens with medication, such a tremor would not be considered to meet
the criteria for a Medication-Induced Postural Tremor and would be coded as Medica-
tion-Induced Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. The factors described
above that may contribute to the severity of a Medication-Induced Postural Tremor (e.g.,
anxiety, stress, fatigue, hypoglycemia, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma, hypothermia,
and Alcohol Withdrawal) may also be a cause of tremor independent of the medication.
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor is not diagnosed if the tremor is better
accounted for by Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism. A Medication-Induced Postural
Tremor is usually absent at rest and intensifies when the affected part is brought into
action or held in a sustained position. In contrast, the tremor related to Neuroleptic-
Induced Parkinsonism is usually lower in frequency, worse at rest, and suppressed during
intentional movement and usually occurs in association with other symptoms of
Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism (e.g., akinesia, rigidity).Defensive Functioning Scale
751
Research criteria for 333.1 Medication-Induced
Postural Tremor
A. A fine postural tremor that has developed in association with the use of
a medication (e.g., lithium, antidepressant medication, valproic acid).
B. The tremor (i.e., a regular, rhythmic oscillation of the limbs, head,
mouth, or tongue) has a frequency between 8 and 12 cycles per second.
C. The symptoms are not due to a preexisting nonpharmacologically
induced tremor. Evidence that the symptoms are due to a preexisting
tremor might include the following: the tremor was present prior to the
introduction of the medication, the tremor does not correlate with serum
levels of the medication, and the tremor persists after discontinuation
of the medication.
D. The symptoms are not better accounted for by Neuroleptic-Induced
Parkinsonism.
333.90 Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified
This category is for Medication-Induced Movement Disorders that do not meet criteria
for any of the specific disorders listed above. Examples include 1) parkinsonism, acute
akathisia, acute dystonia. or dyskinetic movement that is associated with a medication
other than a neuroleptic; 2) a presentation that resembles Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome that is associated with a medication other than a neuroleptic; or 3) tardive
dystonia.
Proposed Axes for Further Study
Defensive Functioning Scale
Defense mechanisms (or coping styles) are automatic psychological processes that
protect the individual against anxiety and from the awareness of internal or external
dangers or stressors. Individuals are often unaware of these processes as they operate.
Defense mechanisms mediate the individual's reaction to emotional conflicts and to
internal and external stressors. The individual defense mechanisms are divided concep-
tually and empirically into related groups that are referred to as Defense Levels.
To use the Defensive Functioning Scale, the clinician should list up to seven of the
specific defenses or coping styles (starting with the most prominent) and then indicate
the predominant defense level exhibited by the individual. These should reflect the
defenses or coping styles employed at the time of evaluation, supplemented by whatever752
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
information is available about the individual's defenses or coping patterns during the
recent time period that preceded the evaluation. The specific defense mechanisms listed
may be drawn from the different Defense Levels.
The Defensive Functioning Axis is presented first, followed by a recording form.
The rest of the section consists of a list of definitions for the specific defense mechanisms
and coping styles.
Defense Levels and Individual Defense Mechanisms
High adaptive level. This level of defensive functioning results in optimal adaptation
in the handling of stressors. These defenses usually maximize gratification and allow the
conscious awareness of feelings, ideas, and their consequences. They also promote an
optimum balance among conflicting motives. Examples of defenses at this level are
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
anticipation
affiliation
altruism
humor
self-assertion
self-observation
sublimation
suppression
Mental inhibitions (compromise formation) level. Defensive functioning at this
level keeps potentially threatening ideas, feelings, memories, wishes, or fears out of
awareness. Examples are
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
displacement
dissociation
intellectualization
isolation of affect
reaction formation
repression
undoing
Minor image-distorting level. This level is characterized by distortions in the image
of the self, body, or others that may be employed to regulate self-esteem. Examples are
• devaluation
• idealization
• omnipotence
Disavowal level. This level is characterized by keeping unpleasant or unacceptable
stressors, impulses, ideas, affects, or responsibility out of awareness with or without a
misattribution of these to external causes. Examples are
• denial
• projection
• rationalizationDefensive Functioning Scale
753
Major image-distorting level. This level is characterized by gross distortion or
misattribution of the image of self or others. Examples are
• autistic fantasy
• projective identification
• splitting of self-image or image of others
Action level. This level is characterized by defensive functioning that deals with
internal or external stressors by action or withdrawal. Examples are
•
•
•
•
acting out
apathetic withdrawal
help-rejecting complaining
passive aggression
Level of defensive dysregulation. This level is characterized by failure of defensive
regulation to contain the individual's reaction to stressors, leading to a pronounced break
with objective reality. Examples are
• delusional projection
• psychotic denial
• psychotic distortion754
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Recording Form: Defensive Functioning Scale
A. Current Defenses or Coping Styles: List in order, beginning with most prominent
defenses or coping styles.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
B. Predominant Current Defense Level:
Example
Axis I:
296.32
305.40
301.83
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Moderate
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Abuse
Axis II:
Borderline Personality Disorder
Antisocial personality features
Axis III: 881.02 Lacerations of wrist
Axis IV:
Recent arrest
Expulsion from home by parents
Axis V: GAP = 45 (current)
Recording Form: Defensive Functioning Scale
A. Current Defenses or Coping Styles:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
splitting
projection identification
acting out
devaluation
omnipotence
denial
projection
B. Predominant Current Defense Level: major image-distorting levelDefensive Functioning Scale
755
Glossary of Specific Defense Mechanisms and Coping Styles
acting out The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors
by actions rather than reflections or feelings. This definition is broader than the original
concept of the acting out of transference feelings or wishes during psychotherapy and
is intended to include behavior arising both within and outside the transference
relationship. Defensive acting out is not synonymous with "bad behavior" because it
requires evidence that the behavior is related to emotional conflicts.
affiliation The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors
by turning to others for help or support. This involves sharing problems with others but
does not imply trying to make someone else responsible for them.
altruism The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors
by dedication to meeting the needs of others. Unlike the self-sacrifice sometimes
characteristic of reaction formation, the individual receives gratification either vicariously
or from the response of others.
anticipation The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by experiencing emotional reactions in advance of, or anticipating conse-
quences of, possible future events and considering realistic, alternative responses or
solutions.
autistic fantasy The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by excessive daydreaming as a substitute for human relationships, more
effective action, or problem solving.
denial The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors by
refusing to acknowledge some painful aspect of external reality or subjective experience
that would be apparent to others. The term psychotic denial is used when there is gross
impairment in reality testing.
devaluation The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by attributing exaggerated negative qualities to self or others.
displacement The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by transferring a feeling about, or a response to, one object onto another
(usually less threatening) substitute object.
dissociation The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors with a breakdown in the usually integrated functions of consciousness, memory,
perception of self or the environment, or sensory/motor behavior.
help-rejecting complaining The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal
or external stressors by complaining or making repetitious requests for help that disguise
covert feelings of hostility or reproach toward others, which are then expressed by
rejecting the suggestions, advice, or help that others offer. The complaints or requests
may involve physical or psychological symptoms or life problems.
humor The individual deals with emotional conflict or external stressors by empha-
sizing the amusing or ironic aspects of the conflict or stressor.756
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
idealization The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by attributing exaggerated positive qualities to others.
intellectualization The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by the excessive use of abstract thinking or the making of generalizations to
control or minimize disturbing feelings.
isolation of affect The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by the separation of ideas from the feelings originally associated with them.
The individual loses touch with the feelings associated with a given idea (e.g., a traumatic
event) while remaining aware of the cognitive elements of it (e.g., descriptive details).
omnipotence The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by feeling or acting as if he or she possesses special powers or abilities and is
superior to others.
passive aggression The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by indirectly and unassertively expressing aggression toward others. There is
a facade of overt compliance masking covert resistance, resentment, or hostility. Passive
aggression often occurs in response to demands for independent action or performance
or the lack of gratification of dependent wishes but may be adaptive for individuals in
subordinate positions who have no other way to express assertiveness more overtly.
projection The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors
by falsely attributing to another his or her own unacceptable feelings, impulses, or
thoughts.
projective identification As in projection, the individual deals with emotional conflict
or internal or external stressors by falsely attributing to another his or her own
unacceptable feelings, impulses, or thoughts. Unlike simple projection, the individual
does not fully disavow what is projected. Instead, the individual remains aware of his
or her own affects or impulses but misattributes them as justifiable reactions to the other
person. Not infrequently, the individual induces the very feelings in others that were first
mistakenly believed to be there, making it difficult to clarify who did what to whom first.
rationalization The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by concealing the true motivations for his or her own thoughts, actions, or
feelings through the elaboration of reassuring or self-serving but incorrect explanations.
reaction formation The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by substituting behavior, thoughts, or feelings that are diametrically opposed
to his or her own unacceptable thoughts or feelings (this usually occurs in conjunction
with their repression).
repression The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors
by expelling disturbing wishes, thoughts, or experiences from conscious awareness. The
feeling component may remain conscious, detached from its associated ideas.
self-assertion The individual deals with emotional conflict or stressors by expressing
his or her feelings and thoughts directly in a way that is not coercive or manipulative.Defensive Functioning Scale
757
self-observation The individual deals with emotional conflict or stressors by reflecting
on his or her own thoughts, feelings, motivation, and behavior, and responding
appropriately.
splitting The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors
by compartmentalizing opposite affect states and failing to integrate the positive and
negative qualities of the self or others into cohesive images. Because ambivalent affects
cannot be experienced simultaneously, more balanced views and expectations of self
or others are excluded from emotional awareness. Self and object images tend to
alternate between polar opposites: exclusively loving, powerful, worthy, nurturant, and
kind—or exclusively bad, hateful, angry, destructive, rejecting, or worthless.
sublimation The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by channeling potentially maladaptive feelings or impulses into socially
acceptable behavior (e.g., contact sports to channel angry impulses).
suppression The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external
stressors by intentionally avoiding thinking about disturbing problems, wishes, feelings,
or experiences.
undoing The individual deals with emotional conflict or internal or external stressors
by words or behavior designed to negate or to make amends symbolically for
unacceptable thoughts, feelings, or actions.758
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Global Assessment of Relational
Functioning (GARF) Scale
Instructions: The GARF Scale can be used to indicate an overall judgment of the
functioning of a family or other ongoing relationship on a hypothetical continuum
ranging from competent, optimal relational functioning to a disrupted, dysfunctional
relationship. It is analogous to Axis V (Global Assessment of Functioning Scale) provided
for individuals in DSM-IV. The GARF Scale permits the clinician to rate the degree to
which a family or other ongoing relational unit meets the affective or instrumental needs
of its members in the following areas:
A. Problem solving—skills in negotiating goals, rules, and routines; adaptability to
stress; communication skills; ability to resolve conflict
B. Organization—maintenance of interpersonal roles and subsystem boundaries;
hierarchical functioning; coalitions and distribution of power, control, and
responsibility
C. Emotional climate—tone and range of feelings; quality of caring, empathy,
involvement, and attachment/commitment; sharing of values; mutual affective
responsiveness, respect, and regard; quality of sexual functioning
In most instances, the GARF Scale should be used to rate functioning during the
current period (i.e., the level of relational functioning at the time of the evaluation). In
some settings, the GARF Scale may also be used to rate functioning for other time periods
(i.e., the highest level of relational functioning for at least a few months during the past
year).
Note: Use specific, intermediate codes when possible, for example, 45, 68, 72. If
detailed information is not adequate to make specific ratings, use midpoints of the five
ranges, that is, 90, 70, 50, 30, or 10.
81—100 Overall: Relational unit is functioning satisfactorily from self-report of partic-
ipants and from perspectives of observers.
Agreed-on patterns or routines exist that help meet the usual needs of each
family/couple member; there is flexibility for change in response to unusual demands
or events; and occasional conflicts and stressful transitions are resolved through
problem-solving communication and negotiation.
There is a shared understanding and agreement about roles and appropriate tasks,
decision making is established for each functional area, and there is recognition of
the unique characteristics and merit of each subsystem (e.g., parents/spouses, siblings,
and individuals).
There is a situationally appropriate, optimistic atmosphere in the family; a wide
range of feelings is freely expressed and managed within the family; and there is a
general atmosphere of warmth, caring, and sharing of values among all family
members. Sexual relations of adult members are satisfactory.
61-80 Overall Functioning of relational unit is somewhat unsatisfactory. Over a
period of time, many but not all difficulties are resolved without complaints.
Daily routines are present but there is some pain and difficulty in responding to
the unusual. Some conflicts remain unresolved, but do not disrupt family functioning.GARF Scale
759
Decision making is usually competent, but efforts at control of one another quite
often are greater than necessary or are ineffective. Individuals and relationships are
clearly demarcated but sometimes a specific subsystem is depreciated or scapegoated.
A range of feeling is expressed, but instances of emotional blocking or tension
are evident. Warmth and caring are present but are marred by a family member's
irritability and frustrations. Sexual activity of adult members may be reduced or
problematic.
41-60 Overall- Relational unit has occasional times of satisfying and competent
functioning together, but clearly dysfunctional, unsatisfying relationships tend to pre-
dominate.
Communication is frequently inhibited by unresolved conflicts that often interfere
with daily routines; there is significant difficulty in adapting to family stress and
transitional change.
Decision making is only intermittently competent and effective; either excessive
rigidity or significant lack of structure is evident at these times. Individual needs are
quite often submerged by a partner or coalition.
Pain or ineffective anger or emotional deadness interfere with family enjoyment.
Although there is some warmth and support for members, it is usually unequally
distributed. Troublesome sexual difficulties between adults are often present.
21-40 Overall: Relational unit is obviously and seriously dysfunctional; forms and
time periods of satisfactory relating are rare.
Family/couple routines do not meet the needs of members; they are grimly
adhered to or blithely ignored. Life cycle changes, such as departures or entries into
the relational unit, generate painful conflict and obviously frustrating failures of
problem solving.
Decision making is tyrannical or quite ineffective. The unique characteristics of
individuals are unappreciated or ignored by either rigid or confusingly fluid coalitions.
There are infrequent periods of enjoyment of life together; frequent distancing
or open hostility reflect significant conflicts that remain unresolved and quite painful.
Sexual dysfunction among adult members is commonplace.
1—20 Overall: Relational unit has become too dysfunctional to retain continuity of
contact and attachment.
Family/couple routines are negligible (e.g., no mealtime, sleeping, or waking
schedule); family members often do not know where others are or when they will
be in or out; there is a little effective communication among family members.
Family/couple members are not organized in such a way that personal or
generational responsibilities are recognized. Boundaries of relational unit as a whole
and subsystems cannot be identified or agreed on. Family members are physically
endangered or injured or sexually attacked.
Despair and cynicism are pervasive; there is little attention to the emotional needs
of others; there is almost no sense of attachment, commitment, or concern about on
another's welfare.
0 Inadequate information.760
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Social and Occupational
Functioning Assessment Scale (SOFAS)
The SOFAS is a new scale that differs from the Global Assessment of Functioning (GAP)
Scale in that it focuses exclusively on the individual's level of social and occupational
functioning and is not directly influenced by the overall severity of the individual's
psychological symptoms. Also in contrast to the GAP Scale, any impairment in social
and occupational functioning that is due to general medical conditions is considered in
making the SOFAS rating. The SOFAS is usually used to rate functioning for the current
period (i.e., the level of functioning at the time of the evaluation). The SOFAS may also
be used to rate functioning for other time periods. For example, for some purposes it
may be useful to evaluate functioning for the past year (i.e., the highest level of
functioning for at least a few months during the past year).SOFAS
761
Social and Occupational
Functioning Assessment Scale (SOFAS)
Consider social and occupational functioning on a continuum from excellent functioning
to grossly impaired functioning. Include impairments in functioning due to physical
limitations, as well as those due to mental impairments. To be counted, impairment must
be a direct consequence of mental and physical health problems; the effects of lack of
opportunity and other environmental limitations are not to be considered.
Code
100
(Note: Use intermediate codes when appropriate, e.g., 45, 68, 72.)
Superior functioning in a wide range of activities.
91
90
Good functioning in all areas, occupationally and socially effective.
81
80
No more than a slight impairment in social, occupational, or school functioning (e.g., infrequent
interpersonal conflict, temporarily falling behind in schoolwork).
71
70
61
60
Some difficulty in social, occupational, or school functioning, but generally functioning well, has
some meaningful interpersonal relationships.
Moderate difficulty in social, occupational, or school functioning (e.g., few friends, conflicts with
peers or co-workers).
51
50
41
40
Serious impairment in social, occupational, or school functioning (e.g., no friends, unable to keep a
job).
31 Major impairment in several areas, such as work or school, family relations (e.g., depressed man
avoids friends, neglects family, and is unable to work; child frequently beats up younger children,
is defiant at home, and is failing at school).
30 Inability to function in almost all areas (e.g., stays in bed all day, no job, home, or friends).
21
20
Occasionally fails to maintain minimal personal hygiene; unable to function independently.
11
10
1
0
Persistent inability to maintain minimal personal hygiene. Unable to function without harming self
or others or without considerable external support (e.g., nursing care and supervision).
Inadequate information.
Note: The rating of overall psychological functioning on a scale of 0-100 was operationalized by
Luborsky in the Health-Sickness Rating Scale. (Luborsky L: "Clinicians' Judgments of Mental Health."
Archives of General Psychiatry 7:407-417, 1962). Spitzer and colleagues developed a revision of the Health-
Sickness Rating Scale called the Global Assessment Scale (GAS) (EndicottJ, Spitzer RL, Fleiss JL, et al.: "The
Global Assessment Scale: A Procedure for Measuring Overall Severity of Psychiatric Disturbance." Archives
of General Psychiatry 33:766-771, 1976). The SOFAS is derived from the GAS and its development is
described in Goldman HH, Skodol AE, Lave TR: "Revising Axis V for DSM-IV: A Review of Measures of
Social Functioning." American Journal of Psychiatry 149:1148-1156, 1992.This page intentionally left blankAppendix C
Glossary of Technical Terms
affect A pattern of observable behaviors that is the expression of a subjectively
experienced feeling state (emotion). Common examples of affect are sadness, elation,
and anger. In contrast to mood, which refers to a more pervasive and sustained emotional
"climate," affect refers to more fluctuating changes in emotional "weather." What is
considered the normal range of the expression of affect varies considerably, both within
and among different cultures. Disturbances in affect include
blunted Significant reduction in the intensity of emotional expression.
flat Absence or near absence of any signs of affective expression.
inappropriate Discordance between affective expression and the content of
speech or ideation.
labile Abnormal variability in affect with repeated, rapid, and abrupt shifts in
affective expression.
restricted or constricted Mild reduction in the range and intensity of emotional
expression.
agitation (psychomotor agitation) Excessive motor activity associated with a feeling
of inner tension. The activity is usually nonproductive and repetitious and consists of
such behavior as pacing, fidgeting, wringing of the hands, pulling of clothes, and inability
to sit still.
agonist medication A chemical entity extrinsic to endogenously produced substances
that acts on a receptor and is capable of producing the maximal effect that can be
produced by stimulating that receptor. A partial agonist is capable only of producing
less than the maximal effect even when given in a concentration sufficient to bind with
all available receptors.
agonist/antagonist medication A chemical entity extrinsic to endogenously pro-
duced substances that acts on a family of receptors (such as mu, delta, and kappa opiate
Glossary definitions were informed by the following sources: DSM-III; DSM-III-R; American Psychiatric
Glossary, 6th Edition; Penguin Dictionary of Psychology; Campbell's Psychiatric Dictionary, 6th Edition;
Stedman's Medical Dictionary, 19th Edition; Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 25th Edition; and
Webster's Third New International Dictionary.
763764
Appendix C
receptors) in such a fashion that it is an agonist or partial agonist on one type of receptor
and an antagonist on another.
alogia An impoverishment in thinking that is inferred from observing speech and
language behavior. There may be brief and concrete replies to questions and restriction
in the amount of spontaneous speech (poverty of speech}. Sometimes the speech is
adequate in amount but conveys little information because it is overconcrete, over-
abstract, repetitive, or stereotyped (poverty of content).
amnesia Loss of memory. Types of amnesia include
anterograde Loss of memory of events that occur after the onset of the etiological
condition or agent.
retrograde Loss of memory of events that occurred before the onset of the
etiological condition or agent.
antagonist medication A chemical entity extrinsic to endogenously produced sub-
stances that occupies a receptor, produces no physiologic effects, and prevents
endogenous and exogenous chemicals from producing an effect on that receptor.
anxiety The apprehensive anticipation of future danger or misfortune accompanied
by a feeling of dysphoria or somatic symptoms of tension. The focus of anticipated
danger may be internal or external.
aphasia An impairment in the understanding or transmission of ideas by language in
any of its forms—reading, writing, or speaking—that is due to injury or disease of the
brain centers involved in language.
aphonia An inability to produce speech sounds that require the use of the larynx that
is not due to a lesion in the central nervous system.
ataxia Partial or complete loss of coordination of voluntary muscular movement.
attention The ability to focus in a sustained manner on a particular stimulus or activity.
A disturbance in attention may be manifested by easy distractibility or difficulty in
finishing tasks or in concentrating on work.
avolition An inability to initiate and persist in goal-directed activities. When severe
enough to be considered pathological, avolition is pervasive and prevents the person
from completing many different types of activities (e.g., work, intellectual pursuits,
self-care).
catalepsy Waxy flexibility—rigid maintenance of a body position over an extended
period of time.
cataplexy Episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone resulting in the individual
collapsing, often in association with intense emotions such as laughter, anger, fear, or
surprise.
catatonic behavior Marked motor abnormalities including motoric immobility (i.e.,
catalepsy or stupor), certain types of excessive motor activity (apparently purposeless
agitation not influenced by external stimuli), extreme negativism (apparent motivelessGlossary of Technical Terms
765
resistance to instructions or attempts to be moved) or mutism, posturing or stereotyped
movements, and echolalia or echopraxia.
conversion symptom A loss of, or alteration in, voluntary motor or sensory function-
ing suggesting a neurological or general medical condition. Psychological factors are
judged to be associated with the development of the symptom, and the symptom is not
fully explained by a neurological or general medical condition or the direct effects of a
substance. The symptom is not intentionally produced or feigned and is not culturally
sanctioned.
defense mechanism Automatic psychological process that protects the individual
against anxiety and from awareness of internal or external stressors or dangers. Defense
mechanisms mediate the individual's reaction to emotional conflicts and to external
stressors. Some defense mechanisms (e.g., projection, splitting, and acting out) are almost
invariably maladaptive. Others, such as suppression and denial, may be either maladap-
tive or adaptive, depending on their severity, their inflexibility, and the context in which
they occur. Definitions of specific defense mechanisms and how they would be recorded
using the Defensive Functioning Scale are presented on p. 751.
delusion A false belief based on incorrect inference about external reality that is firmly
sustained despite what almost everyone else believes and despite what constitutes
incontrovertible and obvious proof or evidence to the contrary. The belief is not one
ordinarily accepted by other members of the person's culture or subculture (e.g., it is
not an article of religious faith). When a false belief involves a value judgment, it is
regarded as a delusion only when the judgment is so extreme as to defy credibility.
Delusional conviction occurs on a continuum and can sometimes be inferred from an
individual's behavior. It is often difficult to distinguish between a delusion and an
overvalued idea (in which case the individual has an unreasonable belief or idea but
does not hold it as firmly as is the case with a delusion).
Delusions are subdivided according to their content. Some of the more common types
are listed below:
bizarre A delusion that involves a phenomenon that the person's culture would
regard as totally implausible.
delusional jealousy The delusion that one's sexual partner is unfaithful.
erotomanic A delusion that another person, usually of higher status, is in love
with the individual.
grandiose A delusion of inflated worth, power, knowledge, identity, or special
relationship to a deity or famous person.
mood-congruent See mood-congruent psychotic features.
mood-incongruent See mood-incongruent psychotic features.
of being controlled A delusion in which feelings, impulses, thoughts, or actions
are experienced as being under the control of some external force rather than being
under one's own control.
of reference A delusion whose theme is that events, objects, or other persons in
one's immediate environment have a particular and unusual significance. These
delusions are usually of a negative or pejorative nature, but also may be grandiose
in content. This differs from an idea of reference, in which the false belief is not as
firmly held nor as fully organized into a true belief.
persecutory A delusion in which the central theme is that one (or someone to766
Appendix C
whom one is close) is being attacked, harassed, cheated, persecuted, or conspired
against.
somatic A delusion whose main content pertains to the appearance or functioning
of one's body.
thought broadcasting The delusion that one's thoughts are being broadcast out
loud so that they can be perceived by others.
thought insertion The delusion that certain of one's thoughts are not one's own,
but rather are inserted into one's mind.
depersonalization An alteration in the perception or experience of the self so that
one feels detached from, and as if one is an outside observer of, one's mental processes
or body (e.g., feeling like one is in a dream).
derailment ("loosening of associations") A pattern of speech in which a person's ideas
slip off one track onto another that is completely unrelated or only obliquely related. In
moving from one sentence or clause to another, the person shifts the topic idiosyncrat-
ically from one frame of reference to another and things may be said in juxtaposition
that lack a meaningful relationship. This disturbance occurs between clauses, in contrast
to incoherence, in which the disturbance is within clauses. An occasional change of
topic without warning or obvious connection does not constitute derailment.
derealization An alteration in the perception or experience of the external world so
that it seems strange or unreal (e.g., people may seem unfamiliar or mechanical).
disorientation Confusion about the time of day, date, or season (time), where one is
(place), or who one is (person).
dissociation A disruption in the usually integrated functions of consciousness, mem
ory, identity, or perception of the environment. The disturbance may be sudden or
gradual, transient or chronic.
distractibility The inability to maintain attention, that is, the shifting from one area or
topic to another with minimal provocation, or attention being drawn too frequently to
unimportant or irrelevant external stimuli.
dysarthria Imperfect articulation of speech due to disturbances of muscular control.
dyskinesia Distortion of voluntary movements with involuntary muscular activity.
dyssomnia Primary disorders of sleep or wakefulness characterized by insomnia or
hypersomnia as the major presenting symptom. Dyssomnias are disorders of the amount,
quality, or timing of sleep.
dystonia Disordered tonicity of muscles.
echolalia The pathological, parrotlike, and apparently senseless repetition (echoing)
of a word or phrase just spoken by another person.
echopraxia Repetition by imitation of the movements of another. The action is not a
willed or voluntary one and has a semiautomatic and uncontrollable quality.
flashback A recurrence of a memory, feeling, or perceptual experience from the past.Glossary of Technical Terms
767
flight of ideas A nearly continuous flow of accelerated speech with abrupt changes
from topic to topic that are usually based on understandable associations, distracting
stimuli, or plays on words. When severe, speech may be disorganized and incoherent.
gender dysphoria A persistent aversion toward some or all of those physical
characteristics or social roles that connote one's own biological sex.
gender identity A person's inner conviction of being male or female.
gender role Attitudes, patterns of behavior, and personality attributes defined by the
culture in which the person lives as stereotypically "masculine" or "feminine" social roles.
grandiosity An inflated appraisal of one's worth, power, knowledge, importance, or
identity. When extreme, grandiosity may be of delusional proportions.
hallucination A sensory perception that has the compelling sense of reality of a true
perception but that occurs without external stimulation of the relevant sensory organ.
Hallucinations should be distinguished from illusions, in which an actual external
stimulus is misperceived or misinterpreted. The person may or may not have insight into
the fact that he or she is having a hallucination. One person with auditory hallucinations
may recognize that he or she is having a false sensory experience, whereas another may
be convinced that the source of the sensory experience has an independent physical
reality. The term hallucination is not ordinarily applied to the false perceptions that
occur during dreaming, while falling asleep (hypnagogic), or when awakening (hypno-
pompic). Transient hallucinatory experiences may occur in people without a mental
disorder.
Types of hallucinations include
auditory A hallucination involving the perception of sound, most commonly of
voices. Some clinicians and investigators would not include those experiences
perceived as coming from inside the head and would instead limit the concept of
true auditory hallucinations to those sounds whose source is perceived as being
external. However, as used in DSM-IV, no distinction is made as to whether the
source of the voices is perceived as being inside or outside of the head.
gustatory A hallucination involving the perception of taste (usually unpleasant).
mood-congruent .See mood-congruent psychotic features.
mood-incongruent See mood-incongruent psychotic features.
olfactory A hallucination involving the perception of odor, such as of burning
rubber or decaying fish.
somatic A hallucination involving the perception of a physical experience local-
ized within the body (such as a feeling of electricity). A somatic hallucination is to
be distinguished from physical sensations arising from an as-yet undiagnosed
general medical condition, from hypochondriacal preoccupation with normal
physical sensations, and from a tactile hallucination.
tactile A hallucination involving the perception of being touched or of something
being under one's skin. The most common tactile hallucinations are the sensation
of electric shocks and formication (\he sensation of something creeping or crawling
on or under the skin).
visual A hallucination involving sight, which may consist of formed images, such
as of people, or of unformed images, such as flashes of light. Visual hallucinations
should be distinguished from illusions, which are misperceptions of real external stimuli768
Appendix C
hyperacusis Painful sensitivity to sounds.
hypersomnia Excessive sleepiness, as evidenced by prolonged nocturnal sleep,
difficulty maintaining an alert awake state during the day, or undesired daytime sleep
episodes.
ideas of reference The feeling that casual incidents and external events have a
particular and unusual meaning that is specific to the person. This is to be distinguished
from a delusion of reference, in which there is a belief that is held with delusional
conviction.
illusion A misperception or misinterpretation of a real external stimulus, such as
hearing the rustling of leaves as the sound of voices. See also hallucination.
incoherence Speech or thinking that is essentially incomprehensible to others
because words or phrases are joined together without a logical or meaningful connec-
tion. This disturbance occurs within clauses, in contrast to derailment, in which the
disturbance is between clauses. This has sometimes been referred to as "word salad" to
convey the degree of linguistic disorganization. Mildly ungrammatical constructions or
idiomatic usages characteristic of particular regional or cultural backgrounds, lack of
education, or low intelligence should not be considered incoherence. The term is
generally not applied when there is evidence that the disturbance in speech is due to
an aphasia.
insomnia A subjective complaint of difficulty falling or staying asleep or poor sleep
quality. Types of insomnia include
initial insomnia Difficulty in falling asleep.
middle insomnia Awakening in the middle of the night followed by eventually
falling back to sleep, but with difficulty.
terminal insomnia Awakening before one's usual waking time and being unable
to return to sleep.
intersex condition A condition in which an individual shows intermingling, in various
degrees, of the characteristics of each sex, including physical form, reproductive organs,
and sexual behavior.
macropsia The visual perception that objects are larger than they actually are.
magical thinking The erroneous belief that one's thoughts, words, or actions will
cause or prevent a specific outcome in some way that defies commonly understood laws
of cause and effect. Magical thinking may be a part of normal child development.
micropsia The visual perception that objects are smaller than they actually are.
mood A pervasive and sustained emotion that colors the perception of the world.
Common examples of mood include depression, elation, anger, and anxiety. In contrast
to affect, which refers to more fluctuating changes in emotional "weather," mood refers
to a more pervasive and sustained emotional "climate."
Types of mood include
dysphoric An unpleasant mood, such as sadness, anxiety, or irritability.
elevated An exaggerated feeling of well-being, or euphoria or elation. A personGlossary of Technical Terms
769
with elevated mood may describe feeling "high," "ecstatic," "on top of the world,"
or "up in the clouds."
euthymic Mood in the "normal" range, which implies the absence of depressed
or elevated mood.
expansive Lack of restraint in expressing one's feelings, frequently with an
overvaluation of one's significance or importance.
irritable Easily annoyed and provoked to anger.
mood-congruent psychotic features Delusions or hallucinations whose content is
entirely consistent with the typical themes of a depressed or manic mood. If the mood
is depressed, the content of the delusions or hallucinations would involve themes of
personal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment. The
content of the delusion may include themes of persecution if these are based on
self-derogatory concepts such as deserved punishment. If the mood is manic, the content
of the delusions or hallucinations would involve themes of inflated worth, power,
knowledge, or identity, or a special relationship to a deity or a famous person. The
content of the delusion may include themes of persecution if these are based on concepts
such as inflated worth or deserved punishment.
mood-incongruent psychotic features Delusions or hallucinations whose content
is not consistent with the typical themes of a depressed or manic mood. In the case of
depression, the delusions or hallucinations would not involve themes of personal
inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment. In the case of mania,
the delusions or hallucinations would not involve themes of inflated worth, power,
knowledge, or identity, or a special relationship to a deity or a famous person. Examples
of mood-incongruent psychotic features include persecutory delusions (without self-
derogatory or grandiose content), thought insertion, thought broadcasting, and delusions
of being controlled whose content has no apparent relationship to any of the themes
listed above.
nystagmus Involuntary rhythmic movements of the eyes that consist of small-
amplitude rapid tremors in one direction and a larger, slower, recurrent sweep in the
opposite direction. Nystagmus may be horizontal, vertical, or rotary.
overvalued idea An unreasonable and sustained belief that is maintained with less
than delusional intensity (i.e., the person is able to acknowledge the possibility that the
belief may not be true). The belief is not one that is ordinarily accepted by other members
of the person's culture or subculture.
panic attacks Discrete periods of sudden onset of intense apprehension, fearfulness,
or terror, often associated with feelings of impending doom. During these attacks there
are symptoms such as shortness of breath or smothering sensations; palpitations,
pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate; chest pain or discomfort; choking; and fear
of going crazy or losing control. Panic attacks may be unexpected (uncued), in which
the onset of the attack is not associated with a situational trigger and instead occurs "out
of the blue"; situationally bound, in which the panic attack almost invariably occurs
immediately on exposure to, or in anticipation of, a situational trigger ("cue"); and
situationally predisposed, in which the panic attack is more likely to occur on
exposure to a situational trigger but is not invariably associated with it.770
Appendix C
paranoid ideation Ideation, of less than delusional proportions, involving suspicious-
ness or the belief that one is being harassed, persecuted, or unfairly treated.
parasomnia Abnormal behavior or physiological events occurring during sleep or
sleep-wake transitions.
personality Enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the
environment and oneself. Personality traits are prominent aspects of personality that are
exhibited in a wide range of important social and personal contexts. Only when
personality traits are inflexible and maladaptive and cause either significant functional
impairment or subjective distress do they constitute a Personality Disorder.
phobia A persistent, irrational fear of a specific object, activity, or situation (the phobic
stimulus) that results in a compelling desire to avoid it. This often leads either to
avoidance of the phobic stimulus or to enduring it with dread.
pressured speech Speech that is increased in amount, accelerated, and difficult or
impossible to interrupt. Usually it is also loud and emphatic. Frequently the person
talks without any social stimulation and may continue to talk even though no one is
listening.
prodrome An early or premonitory sign or symptom of a disorder.
psychomotor agitation See agitation.
psychomotor retardation Visible generalized slowing of movements and speech.
psychotic This term has historically received a number of different definitions, none
of which has achieved universal acceptance. The narrowest definition of psychotic is
restricted to delusions or prominent hallucinations, with the hallucinations occurring in
the absence of insight into their pathological nature. A slightly less restrictive definition
would also include prominent hallucinations that the individual realizes are hallucinatory
experiences. Broader still is a definition that also includes other positive symptoms of
Schizophrenia (i.e., disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior).
Unlike these definitions based on symptoms, the definition used in DSM-II and ICD-9
was probably far too inclusive and focused on the severity of functional impairment, so
that a mental disorder was termed psychotic if it resulted in "impairment that grossly
interferes with the capacity to meet ordinary demands of life." Finally, the term has been
defined conceptually as a loss of ego boundaries or a gross impairment in reality testing.
Based on their characteristic features, the different disorders in DSM-IV emphasize
different aspects of the various definitions of psychotic.
residual phase The phase of an illness that occurs after remission of the florid
symptoms or the full syndrome.
sex A person's biological status as male, female, or uncertain. Depending on the
circumstances, this determination may be based on the appearance of the external
genitalia or on karyotyping.
sign An objective manifestation of a pathological condition. Signs are observed by the
examiner rather than reported by the affected individual.Glossary of Technical Terms
771
stereotyped movements Repetitive, seemingly driven, and nonfunctional motor
behavior (e.g., hand shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, mouthing of
objects, self-biting, picking at skin or body orifices, hitting one's own body).
stressor, psychosocial Any life event or life change that may be associated temporally
(and perhaps causally) with the onset, occurrence, or exacerbation of a mental disorder.
stupor A state of unresponsiveness with immobility and mutism.
symptom A subjective manifestation of a pathological condition. Symptoms are
reported by the affected individual rather than observed by the examiner.
syndrome A grouping of signs and symptoms, based on their frequent co-occurrence,
that may suggest a common underlying pathogenesis, course, familial pattern, or
treatment selection.
synesthesia A condition in which a sensory experience associated with one modality
occurs when another modality is stimulated, for example, a sound produces the sensation
of a particular color.
tic An involuntary, sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, stereotyped motor move-
ment or vocalization.
transsexualism Severe gender dysphoria, coupled with a persistent desire for the
physical characteristics and social roles that connote the opposite biological sex.This page intentionally left blankAppendix D
Annotated Listing of
Changes in DSM-IV
T
his appendix outlines the major changes from DSM-III-R that have been included
in the DSM-IV terms and categories. The disorders listed are in the order in which
they appear in the DSM-IV Classification. The annotation includes lists of those diagnoses
that have been introduced into DSM-IV and those DSM-III-R diagnoses that have been
deleted or subsumed into other DSM-IV categories. Please refer to "Use of the Manual"
for an explanation of the conventions, text sections, and organizational plan used in
DSM-IV.
Multiaxial system. Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Learning Disorders, Motor
Skills Disorder, and Communication Disorders (which were coded on Axis II in
DSM-III-R) are all coded on Axis I in DSM-IV. For DSM-IV, only Personality Disorders
and Mental Retardation remain coded on Axis II. Axis III continues to be used for coding
general medical conditions. (Appendix G, which lists selected general medical conditions
with their ICD-9-CM codes, has been introduced into DSM-IV.) In DSM-IV, Axis IV is
used for reporting psychosocial and environmental problems; in contrast, DSM-III-R Axis
IV provided a rating scale for severity of stressors. Axis V (the Global Assessment of
Functioning Scale) is essentially the same as in DSM-III-R, except that the scale extends
over 100 points to include the highest level of functioning. Optional scales (for social
and occupational functioning apart from symptomatology, for relational functioning, and
for defense mechanisms) are included in Appendix B, on p. 751.
Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in
Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence
Mental Retardation. The criteria have been modified to be more compatible with
the American Association of Mental Retardation definition.
Learning Disorders. The name has been changed from the DSM-III-R Academic
Skills Disorders to reflect common clinical usage. The exclusion criterion (Criterion C)
773774
Appendix D
has been modified to allow a diagnosis of Learning Disorder in the presence of a sensory
deficit so long as the learning difficulties are in excess of those usually associated with
the sensory deficit. In addition, the DSM-III-R exclusion criterion has been modified to
allow the diagnosis of a Learning Disorder in the presence of a general medical
(neurological) condition. In contrast to DSM-III-R, Learning Disorders are coded on Axis I
in DSM-IV.
Communication Disorders. This section brings together under one heading all of
the speech and language disorders that in DSM-III-R were listed in two separate
sections—the Specific Developmental Disorders and Speech Disorders Not Elsewhere
Classified.
Expressive Language Disorder. This diagnosis is no longer excluded in the pres-
ence of a speech-motor deficit, a sensory deficit, or environmental deprivation so long
as the language difficulties are in excess of those usually associated with these problems.
In contrast to DSM-III-R, Expressive Language Disorder is coded on Axis I in DSM-IV.
Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder. This diagnosis replaces DSM-III-R
Developmental Receptive Language Disorder in recognition of the fact that receptive
language problems do not occur in isolation without accompanying expressive language
problems. This diagnosis is no longer excluded in the presence of a speech-motor deficit,
sensory deficit, or environmental deprivation so long as the language difficulties are in
excess of those usually associated with these problems. In contrast to DSM-III-R, Mixed
Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder is coded on Axis I in DSM-IV.
Phonological Disorder. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Developmen-
tal Articulation Disorder to conform to current terminology. This diagnosis is no longer
excluded in the presence of a speech-motor deficit, sensory deficit, or environmental
deprivation so long as the language difficulties are in excess of those usually associated
with these problems. In contrast to DSM-III-R, Phonological Disorder is coded on Axis
I in DSM-IV.
Stuttering. The DSM-III-R criteria set consisted of a one-sentence definition. An
expanded and more specific criteria set has been added.
Pervasive Developmental Disorders. In contrast to DSM-III-R, Pervasive Develop-
mental Disorders are coded on Axis I in DSM-IV.
Autistic Disorder. The DSM-III-R defining features (impaired social interaction,
communication, and stereotyped patterns of behavior) are retained in DSM-IV, but the
individual items and the overall diagnostic algorithm have been modified to 1) improve
clinical utility by reducing the number of items from 16 to 12 and by increasing the
clarity of individual items; 2) increase compatibility with the ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria
for Research; and 3) narrow the definition of caseness so that it conforms more closely
with clinical judgment, DSM-III, and ICD-10. In addition, an "age at onset" requirement
(before age 3 years in DSM-IV), which had been dropped in DSM-III-R, has been
reinstated to conform to clinical usage and to increase the homogeneity of this category.Annotated listing of Changes in DSM-IV
775
Rett's Disorder, Childhood Disintegrative Disorder, and Asperger's Disorder.
These three disorders have been included to improve differential diagnosis and to
provide greater specificity in describing those individuals who would have been
diagnosed with either Autistic Disorder or Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not
Otherwise Specified in DSM-III-R.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. This integrates into one overarching
category what were two categories in DSM-III-R: Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
and Undifferentiated Attention-Deficit Disorder (without hyperactivity). Literature re-
views, data reanalysis, and results from the field trials suggest that this disorder is best
viewed as a unitary disorder with different predominating symptom patterns. DSM-IV
provides one criteria set with three subtypes (Combined Type, Predominantly Inattentive
Type, Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive Type) that allow the clinician to note the
predominance of either attention-deficit symptoms or hyperactivity-impulsivity symp-
toms. Criterion A organizes the items into three groupings: inattention, hyperactivity,
and impulsivity. Criterion C, which requires the presence of symptoms in two or more
situations (e.g., at school, work, and home), has been added to reduce false-positive
diagnoses.
Conduct Disorder. The DSM-III-R item list was modified and expanded (by adding
two items: "staying out at night" and "intimidating others"). This modification is based
on the field-trial results and provides a definition that includes behaviors characteristic
of females with Conduct Disorder. In addition, the items are organized into thematically
related groups (aggression to people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness
or theft, serious violations of rules) to facilitate their use. New subtypes based on age
at onset have been provided in DSM-IV to reflect that earlier age at onset has a worse
prognosis and is more likely to be associated with aggressive behavior and with adult
Antisocial Personality Disorder.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder. Based on field-trial results, one item was deleted
from Criterion A ("uses obscene language"). In addition, an impairment criterion was
added to help demarcate the boundary with normality.
Feeding and Eating Disorders of Infancy or Early Childhood. The name of this
category has been changed to reflect the placement of Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia
Nervosa in a separate Eating Disorders section.
Pica. The DSM-III-R criterion excluding this disorder in the presence of Schizophrenia
or a Pervasive Developmental Disorder has been changed to allow the diagnosis in the
presence of another mental disorder if the behavior is sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
Rumination Disorder. The criterion requiring weight loss or failure to make ex-
pected weight gain was omitted because clinically significant impairment can be present
in the absence of these features and to clarify the boundary with Feeding Disorder of
Infancy or Early Childhood.776
Appendix D
Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood. This new category was added
to provide diagnostic coverage for infants and children who fail to eat adequately and
who have attendant problems in gaining or maintaining weight.
Tic Disorders. The upper limit of age at onset has been reduced from age 21 years
to age 18 years for compatibility with the ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
A criterion that specifies that the tics cause clinically significant impairment or distress
has also been added.
Encopresis. The duration requirement has been reduced from 6 months to 3 months
to reflect clinical usage and to allow for earlier case finding. The disorder is now coded
based on whether or not constipation with overflow incontinence is present.
Enuresis (Not Due to a General Medical Condition). The specified frequency and
duration threshold has been raised (from twice a month to twice a week for 3 consecutive
months) in an effort to reduce false-positive diagnoses. In an effoit to avoid false-negative
diagnoses, Criterion B also notes that the diagnosis can be made below these thresholds
if there is clinically significant impairment or distress.
Separation Anxiety Disorder. Two DSM-III-R items (8 and 9) have been combined
to reduce redundancy. The duration requirement has been increased to 4 weeks for
compatibility with ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Selective Mutism. Several provisions have been added to reduce false-positive
identification: a duration criterion of 1 month, the exclusion of children who are quiet
only during the first month of school, a criterion requiring clinically significant impair-
ment, and a criterion requiring that the lack of speech is not better accounted for by a
Communication Disorder or by lack of knowledge of the spoken language required in
a social situation. In addition, the name has been changed from DSM-III-R Elective
Mutism, which was less descriptive and implied motivation.
Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood.
Subtypes that
designate inhibited type versus disinhibited type have been added to allow compatibility
with ICD-10 (which divides this condition into two separate disorders).
Stereotypic Movement Disorder. The name has been changed from the DSM-III-R
Stereotypy/Habit Disorder for compatibility with ICD-10. Unlike DSM-III-R, DSM-IV
specifies that diagnoses of both Mental Retardation and Stereotypic Movement Disorder
are only made if the Stereotypic or self-injurious behavior is severe enough to become
a focus of treatment. In addition, With Self-Injurious Behavior is available as a specifier.
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic and
Other Cognitive Disorders
In DSM-III-R, these disorders were included in the Organic Mental Disorders section.
The term "organic mental disorders" has been eliminated from DSM-IV because it implies
that the other disorders in the manual do not have an "organic" component.Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
777
Delirium. To assist in differential diagnosis, this section includes Delirium Due to a
General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Delirium, which were listed sepa-
rately in DSM-III-R, and adds a new category—Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies.
Several of the DSM-III-R criteria (reduced level of consciousness, sleep disturbance,
psychomotor changes) were dropped because they often have other causes or are
difficult to evaluate, particularly in a general medical/surgical population. Moreover,
disorganized thinking is no longer a required criterion because it cannot be assessed in
individuals who are mute.
Dementia. As in DSM-III-R, this subsection includes Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type
and Vascular Dementia (which was called Multi-Infarct Dementia in DSM-III-R), but it
also includes a specific listing of a variety of dementias due to general medical and
neurological conditions, Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia, and Dementia Due to
Multiple Etiologies. This organization is provided to assist in differential diagnosis. The
definition of dementia has been reorganized and simplified to clarify that dementia is
characterized by multiple cognitive deficits that must include memory impairment.
Personality change, which was a diagnostic feature in DSM-III-R, has been moved to
the "Associated Features and Disorders" section of the DSM-IV text because of its relative
lack of specificity for dementia.
Amnestic Disorders. This section includes Amnestic Disorder Due to a General
Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder, which were
listed separately in DSM-III-R. This organization is provided to assist in differential
diagnosis. The definition of an amnestic disorder has been simplified and the description
of its essential feature (development of memory impairment) has been sharpened.
Mental Disorders Due to a General
Medical Condition Not Elsewhere Classified
Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. This category is in-
cluded because it is a frequent explanation for catatonic symptoms and is important in
their differential diagnosis.
Personality Change Due to a General Medical Condition.
For this disorder,
called Organic Personality Disorder in DSM-III-R, subtypes including Labile, Disinhibited,
Aggressive, Apathetic, and Paranoid have been added.
Substance-Related Disorders
In DSM-III-R, these disorders were located in two different sections: Psychoactive
Substance Use Disorders (i.e., Dependence and Abuse) and Psychoactive Substance-
Induced Organic Mental Disorders. For convenience of use, Substance Use Disorders
and Substance-Induced Disorders are now contained in a single "Substance-Related
Disorders" section.
Substance Dependence. The nine items included in DSM-III-R have been reduced
to seven; two items tapping withdrawal in DSM-III-R have been combined and DSM-III-R
Criterion 4 (i.e., failure to fulfill major role obligations) has been moved to the abuse778
Appendix D
criteria set to sharpen the distinction between Dependence and Abuse. Subtyping for
physiological dependence has been provided to allow the clinician to note the presence
of tolerance or withdrawal. The duration criterion was dropped for two reasons: 1) it is
redundant given that the individual items require a clinically significant duration to be
counted as present; and 2) a clustering criterion has been added to DSM-IV that specifies
that at least three items be present during the same 12-month period. The course
specifiers have been expanded and made more specific to take into account differences
between early and sustained remission, partial and full remission, and whether the
remission occurred while the individual was on agonist therapy or in a controlled
environment.
Substance Abuse. In DSM-III-R, Substance Abuse was a residual category without a
clear conceptual framework. In DSM-IV, Substance Abuse is conceptualized as a
maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to adverse consequences that occurs in
the absence of Substance Dependence. The item list has been expanded from two to
four items by adding "failure to fulfill major role obligations" and "recurrent substance-
related legal problems."
Substance Intoxication. The general definition of intoxication has not been
changed, but some of the substance-specific intoxication criteria sets have been refined.
The criteria sets for Amphetamine Intoxication and Cocaine Intoxication are now
equivalent.
Alcohol Idiosyncratic Intoxication. This has been omitted as a separate category
because of lack of supporting evidence that it is distinct from Alcohol Intoxication.
Substance Withdrawal. The general definition of withdrawal has not been changed,
but some of the substance-specific withdrawal criteria sets have been refined. The criteria
sets for Alcohol Withdrawal and Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal are now
equivalent.
Table of Substance-Induced Disorders. DSM-III-R contained a table indicating the
association between particular classes of substances and particular substance-induced
syndromal presentations. Based on evidence supporting the existence and clinical
relevance of some additional combinations, this table has been expanded in DSM-IV.
The new categories include 1) for Alcohol—Mood, Anxiety, and Sleep Disorders and
Sexual Dysfunction; 2) for Amphetamine—Mood, Anxiety, and Sleep Disorders and
Sexual Dysfunction; 3) for Caffeine—Anxiety and Sleep Disorders; 4) for Cannabis—
Delirium and Anxiety Disorder; 5) for Cocaine—Mood, Anxiety, and Sleep Disorders
and Sexual Dysfunction; 6) for Hallucinogens—Delirium and Anxiety Disorder; 7) for
Inhalants—Delirium, Persisting Dementia, and Psychotic, Mood, and Anxiety Disorders;
8) for Opioids—Delirium and Psychotic, Mood, and Sleep Disorders, and Sexual
Dysfunction; 9) for Phencyclidine—Anxiety Disorder; 10) for Sedatives, Hypnotics, or
Anxiolytics—Persisting Dementia, Psychotic, Mood, Anxiety, and Sleep Disorders, and
Sexual Dysfunction. Specifiers are also provided to indicate whether the symptoms had
their onset during intoxication or withdrawal.Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
779
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders
This section brings together the contents of three sections in DSM-III-R: Schizophrenia,
Delusional Disorder, and Psychotic Disorder Not Elsewhere Classified.
Schizophrenia. DSM-IV increases the required duration of the active-phase symp-
toms from DSM-III-R's 1 week to 1 month to reduce false-positive diagnoses and to
increase compatibility with ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Research. The presentation of
characteristic symptoms in Criterion A has been simplified. Additional negative symp-
toms (alogia and avolition) have been included in Criterion A. The definition of
prodromal and residual phases has been simplified by eliminating the list of specific
symptoms. New course specifiers have been adapted from ICD-10.
Schizoaffective Disorder. The criteria set has been changed to focus on an uninter-
rupted episode of illness rather than on the lifetime pattern of symptoms.
Brief Psychotic Disorder. The DSM-III-R construct of Brief Reactive Psychosis has
been broadened by eliminating the requirement for a severe stressor (although this can
be indicated by the subtype With Marked Stressor). The resulting category now includes
all psychotic disturbances lasting less than 1 month that are not attributable to a mood
disorder and are not due to the direct physiological effects of substance use or a general
medical condition. In addition, the minimum duration of the psychotic symptoms has
been increased from a few hours to 1 day.
Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. The DSM-III-R terms
Organic Delusional Disorder and Organic Hallucinosis were applied to substance-
induced conditions and to those due to a general medical condition. DSM-IV creates
two disorders based on etiology (Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
and Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder [see below]) but combines delusional
disorder and hallucinosis into a single Psychotic Disorder. The distinction between
presentations that are predominantly delusional versus those that are predominantly
characterized by hallucinations is preserved in the subtyping. Psychotic Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition is included in the "Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic
Disorders" section to facilitate differential diagnosis.
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder. The DSM-III-R terms Organic Delusional
Disorder and Organic Hallucinosis were applied to substance-induced conditions and
to those due to a general medical condition. DSM-IV creates two disorders based on
etiology (Psychotic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition [see above] and
Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder) but combines delusional disorder and halluci-
nosis into a single Psychotic Disorder. The distinction between presentations that are
predominantly delusional versus those that are predominantly characterized by halluci-
nations is preserved in the subtyping. Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder is included
in the "Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders" section to facilitate differential
diagnosis.780
Appendix D
Mood Disorders
Major Depressive Episode. DSM-IV adds a Criterion C to ensure the clinical signif-
icance of the symptomatic presentation. In addition, DSM-IV includes a Criterion E that
clarifies the boundary with Bereavement—that is, a Major Depressive Episode may be
diagnosed if the symptoms persist for longer than 2 months after the loss of a loved one.
Manic Episode. The DSM-III duration of 1 week (which had been dropped in
DSM-III-R) has been reinstated in DSM-IV. In contrast to DSM-III-R, Manic Episodes that
are clearly precipitated by antidepressant treatment are diagnosed as Substance-Induced
Manic Episodes and do not count toward a diagnosis of Bipolar I Disorder.
Mixed Episode. In DSM-III-R, Mixed Episodes did not have a separate criteria set and
instead were defined as one of the subtypes of Bipolar Disorder. In DSM-IV, a separate
criteria set is provided that specifies that the symptom criteria for both a Manic Episode
and a Major Depressive Episode are met nearly every day for 1 week.
Hypomanic Episode. In DSM-III-R, Hypomanic Episodes did not have a separate
criteria set and instead were defined with the same criteria (except for severity) as for
a Manic Episode. In DSM-IV, a separate criteria set is provided that specifies a duration
of at least 4 days of mood change (distinct from the usual nondepressed mood) and an
unequivocal change in functioning that is observable by others. In contrast to mania,
hypomania is defined as not severe enough to cause marked impairment or to require
hospitalization.
Dysthymic Disorder. The DSM-III-R subtyping of primary versus secondary was
dropped because of difficulty in applying it and lack of supportive evidence. DSM-IV
adds a criterion to ensure the clinical significance of the symptomatic presentation.
Bipolar Disorders. The organization and terminology for Bipolar Disorders has been
changed in DSM-IV. Bipolar Disorders have been divided into Bipolar I Disorders and
Bipolar II Disorder. Bipolar I Disorders have been divided into Single Manic Episode
and Most Recent Episode Hypomanic, Manic, Mixed, Depressed, and Unspecified.
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode. This disorder is new for DSM-IV and has
been added to increase specificity and for compatibility with ICD-10 coding require-
ments. A duration of 2 months without manic symptoms has been established to define
recurrence.
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic. This disorder is new for
DSM-IV and was added to increase specificity and coverage.
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed. In DSM-III-R, the mixed type in-
cluded presentations of manic and depressive symptoms that were intermixed or rapidly
alternating every few days, with the requirement that the depressive symptoms last at
least 1 full day. This disorder has been modified in DSM-IV to require at least 1 week
of both manic and major depressive symptoms, and that both of these occur nearly every
day.Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
781
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Unspecified. This disorder is new for
DSM-IV and allows the clinician to note the onset of a new mood episode before the
full duration criteria are met.
Bipolar II Disorder. This disorder has been introduced as a separate category in
DSM-IV to cover what in DSM-III-R was an example in Bipolar Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified. Bipolar II Disorder describes presentations in which there is at least one Major
Depressive Episode and at least one Hypomanic Episode but, unlike Bipolar I Disorder,
no history of Manic Episodes. Bipolar II Disorder has been added in response to the
evidence from the literature review and data reanalysis that suggested its utility and to
increase diagnostic coverage.
Mood Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. Text and criteria for this
disorder, which was called Organic Mood Disorder in DSM-III-R, are included in the
"Mood Disorders" section to facilitate differential diagnosis.
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder. Text and criteria for this disorder, which was
called Organic Mood Disorder in DSM-III-R, are included in the "Mood Disorders" section
to facilitate differential diagnosis.
With Catatonic Features. This is a new specifier introduced into DSM-IV to reflect
evidence that many catatonic presentations are associated with mood disorders.
With Melancholic Features. The DSM-IV criteria set for this specifier departs from
that for DSM-III-R and is essentially the same as that for DSM-III, except that it requires
either loss of pleasure or lack of reactivity to pleasurable stimuli (rather than both). This
reflects the evidence from the literature review that the DSM-III definition may have
been too narrow but in other respects was superior to the definition in DSM-III-R.
With Atypical Features. This is a new specifier introduced into DSM-IV to reflect
evidence that this presentation (e.g., mood reactivity, reverse vegetative symptoms,
rejection sensitivity) may have implications for treatment selection.
With Postpartum Onset. This is a new specifier introduced into DSM-IV to reflect
evidence that this presentation may have implications for prognosis and treatment selection.
Longitudinal Course Specifiers. Course specifiers describing the lifetime pattern of
Major Depressive Disorder and Bipolar I and II Disorders have been introduced into
DSM-IV to allow the clinician to specify the degree of interepisode recovery. Diagrams
have also been provided to illustrate various course patterns.
With Seasonal Pattern. Several changes have been made to this specifier so that the
criteria conform more closely to clinical and research usage. These changes include
restricting the application of the seasonal pattern to Major Depressive Episodes only,
elimination of the 60-day window for appearance of symptoms in Criterion A, and the
inclusion of a more specific requirement regarding the relationship between seasonal
and nonseasonal episodes.
With Rapid Cycling.
This is a new specifier introduced into DSM-IV to reflect782
Appendix D
evidence that this presentation may have implications for prognosis and treatment
selection.
Anxiety Disorders
Panic Attack. The criteria set for Panic Attack has been provided separately at the
beginning of the 'Anxiety Disorders" section to clarify that Panic Attacks can occur as
part of the presentation of a variety of Anxiety Disorders. The DSM-III-R items and the
threshold for Panic Attack were supported by the data reanalysis and field-trial results
and remain the same for DSM-IV, but the order of items has been changed to reflect
their frequency.
Panic Disorder Without Agoraphobia. In response to the literature review, data
reanalyses, and field-trial results, the threshold for Panic Disorder Without Agoraphobia
has been revised. The DSM-IV definition requires recurrent unexpected Panic Attacks
accompanied by a month or more of persistent concern about having additional attacks
or about the implications of the attacks, or a significant change in behavior. This is in
contrast to DSM-III-R, which required either four attacks in 4 weeks or one attack
followed by a month of persistent fear of having another attack.
Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia. The threshold for Panic Attacks in Panic Disor-
der With Agoraphobia has been revised in the same way as the threshold for Panic
Disorder Without Agoraphobia. In addition, the definition of Agoraphobia has been
modified to emphasize that agoraphobic fears typically involve a characteristic cluster
of situations. Specific criteria for mild, moderate, and severe that were provided in
DSM-III-R have been deleted. (The general severity specifiers provided in "Use of the
Manual" can be used instead [see p. 21.)
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder. DSM-III-R provided no guid-
ance concerning whether avoidance associated with a general medical condition
warrants this diagnosis. DSM-IV Criterion D indicates that the diagnosis might include
avoidance associated with a general medical condition if the fear is clearly in excess of
that usually associated with this condition.
Specific Phobia. For compatibility with ICD-10, the name of this category has been
changed from Simple Phobia to Specific Phobia. The threshold of the fear in Criterion A
has been raised by requiring that it be marked and excessive or unreasonable (as well
as persistent). Based on literature review and data reanalysis, subtypes are provided that
describe the focus of the phobias.
Social Phobia. This disorder now subsumes DSM-III-R Avoidant Disorder of Child-
hood, and criteria have been modified for childhood presentations.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. The distinction between obsessions and compul-
sions has been clarified. Obsessions cause marked anxiety or distress, whereas compul-
sions (including mental acts) prevent or reduce anxiety or distress. In recognition that
insight into whether the obsessions or compulsions are unreasonable occurs on aAnnotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
783
continuum, a specifier is provided to allow the clinician to note whether the condition
is of the With Poor Insight type.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Based on literature review, data reanalyses, and
field-trial results, the phrase that describes the stressor in DSM-III-R Criterion A, "outside
the range of normal human experience," has been deleted because it was unreliable
and inaccurate (the prevalence of such stressors is not low in general populations).
DSM-IV Criterion A2 instead requires that the person's response to the stressor must
involve intense fear, helplessness, or horror. Physiological reactivity on exposure to cues
was moved from Criterion D (increased arousal) to Criterion B (reexperiencing the
trauma). A criterion requiring that the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or
impairment has been included. Acute and Chronic specifiers are also provided.
Acute Stress Disorder. This category is new in DSM-IV and was added to describe
acute reactions to extreme stress (i.e., occurring within 4 weeks of the stressor and lasting
from 2 days to 4 weeks). It was added for compatibility with ICD-10 and to assist early
case finding, because Acute Stress Disorder may predict the later development of
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder. This disorder now subsumes DSM-III-R Overanx-
ious Disorder of Childhood. Criterion A requires excessive anxiety and worry, in contrast
to DSM-III-R, which included unrealistic worries. A requirement that the person must
find it difficult to control the worry has been added. Based on data reanalysis, Criterion
C now has a 6-item set that is simpler, more reliable, and more coherent than the 18-item
set in DSM-III-R.
Anxiety Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. Text and criteria for this
disorder, which was called Organic Anxiety Disorder in DSM-III-R, are included in the
"Anxiety Disorders" section to facilitate differential diagnosis.
Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder. Text and criteria for this disorder, which was
called Organic Anxiety Disorder in DSM-III-R, are included in the "Anxiety Disorders"
section to facilitate differential diagnosis.
Somatoform Disorders
Socialization Disorder. Based on the literature review, data reanalysis, and field-trial
results, the DSM-III-R list of 35 items has been condensed, simplified, and divided into
four symptom groupings (pain, gastrointestinal, sexual, and pseudoneurological).
Conversion Disorder. Unlike the broader definition in DSM-III-R, the presenting
problem must be a symptom or deficit that affects voluntary motor or sensory
functioning. Other problems that reflect a change in functioning (e.g., pseudocyesis) are
listed under Somatoform Disorder Not Otherwise Specified. A subtyping scheme (Motor,
Sensory, Seizure, Mixed) has been provided for increased specificity and for compatibility
with ICD-10.784
Appendix D
Pain Disorder. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Somatoform Pain
Disorder. The definition has been broadened to include two types of pain disorder: Pain
Disorder Associated With Psychological Factors and Pain Disorder Associated With Both
Psychological Factors and a General Medical Condition. In addition, Acute and Chronic
specifiers are provided.
Hypochondriasis. A specifier is provided to allow the clinician to note whether the
condition is of the With Poor Insight type.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder. The DSM-III-R exclusion that the belief not be of
delusional intensity was dropped so that this diagnosis can now be made concurrently
with a diagnosis of Delusional Disorder.
Factitious Disorders
DSM-IV provides one set of criteria for Factitious Disorder instead of the previous two,
with separate types based on the predominance of presenting signs and symptoms
(Psychological, Physical, Combined).
Dissociative Disorders
Dissociative Amnesia. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Psychogenic
Amnesia to be more descriptive and to be more compatible with ICD-10.
Dissociative Fugue. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Psychogenic Fugue
to be more descriptive and to be more compatible with ICD-10. The requirement for
assumption of a new identity has been dropped because confusion about personal
identity has been found to be the predominant symptom.
Dissociative Identity Disorder. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Mul-
tiple Personality Disorder to be more descriptive. The DSM-III requirement that there
be an inability to recall important personal information has been reinstated.
Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders
Sexual Dysfunctions. Each of the disorders listed in this section now includes a
clinical significance criterion (i.e., that the dysfunction causes marked distress or
interpersonal difficulty).
Female Sexual Arousal Disorder. DSM-IV returns to the DSM-III definition by drop-
ping the DSM-III-R Item A2 that stated that the diagnosis could be given if there were
subjective complaints without any difficulty with physiological arousal.
Male Erectile Disorder. DSM-IV returns to the DSM-III definition by dropping
DSM-III-R Item A2, which allowed the diagnosis to be given even if there were only
subjective complaints without any difficulty with physiological arousal.Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
785
Female Orgasmic Disorder. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Inhibited
Female Orgasm. Criterion A has been simplified and revised to be more in accord with
clinical usage.
Male Orgasmic Disorder.
Male Orgasm.
The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Inhibited
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition. This disorder was in-
cluded in the "Genitourinary System" section of ICD-9-CM, but was not included in the
DSM-III-R Classification. It is included in DSM-IV to facilitate differential diagnosis.
Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction. This disorder was not included in DSM-
III-R and is included in DSM-IV to increase coverage and to facilitate differential
diagnosis.
Transvestic Fetishism. A specifier has been added for those individuals with Trans-
vestic Fetishism who also have persistent discomfort with gender role that does not meet
criteria for Gender Identity Disorder.
Gender Identity Disorder. This DSM-IV diagnosis subsumes three DSM-III-R diag-
noses: Gender Identity Disorder of Childhood; Gender Identity Disorder of Adolescence
or Adulthood, Nontranssexual Type (GIDAANT); and Transsexualism. It is placed in the
"Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders" section rather than in the "Disorders Usually
First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence," section as in DSM-III-R. The
criteria set accommodates both sexes and all ages.
Eating Disorders
Anorexia Nervosa. This disorder has been moved from the "Disorders Usually First
Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence" section to the "Eating Disorders"
section of the Classification. In DSM-IV, a presentation that includes binge eating and
purging that occurs exclusively during Anorexia Nervosa is no longer given a separate
diagnosis of Bulimia Nervosa, but rather is subsumed as a subtype under Anorexia
Nervosa. The subtyping for Anorexia Nervosa now indicates the presence of binge-
eating/purging versus restricting behavior.
Bulimia Nervosa. This disorder has been moved from the "Disorders Usually First
Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence" section to the "Eating Disorders"
section of the Classification. An exclusion criterion has been added so that the diagnosis
is not given if the behavior occurs exclusively during episodes of Anorexia Nervosa.
Subtypes are provided to distinguish between purging and nonpurging types.
Sleep Disorders
The organization of this section has been changed from that in DSM-III-R. The disorders
are grouped into four sections based on presumed etiology (primary, related to another786
Appendix D
mental disorder, due to a general medical condition, and substance-induced), rather
than on presenting symptoms. The section is compatible with the International Classifi-
cation of Sleep Disorders.
Primary Insomnia. The frequency criterion of at least three times a week was
dropped for DSM-IV, although the 1-month duration is retained. A clinical significance
criterion has been added.
Primary Hypersomnia. Hypersomnia is no longer diagnosed if the presentation is
better accounted for by insomnia. The DSM-III-R inclusion of sleep drunkenness (i.e.,
the prolonged transition to the fully awake state) has been deleted as a sufficient criterion
for hypersomnia. A Recurrent subtype has been added for noting the presence of
Kleine-Levin syndrome.
Narcolepsy. This disorder was included in the "Nervous System" section of ICD-9-CM,
but was not included in DSM-III-R. It is included in the "Sleep Disorders" section of
DSM-IV to assist in differential diagnosis.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder. This disorder was included outside the "Mental
Disorders" chapter of ICD-9-CM, but was not included in DSM-III-R. It is included in the
"Sleep Disorders" section of DSM-IV to assist in differential diagnosis.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R
Sleep-Wake Schedule Disorder. Subtyping (Delayed Sleep Phase, Jet Lag, Shift Work)
has been revised to reflect clinical usage.
Nightmare Disorder.
Disorder.
The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Dream Anxiety
Insomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder. In DSM-IV, this diagnosis is used
in addition to the related Axis I or Axis II diagnosis only when the insomnia is sufficiently
severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Hypersomnia Related to Another Mental Disorder. In DSM-IV, this diagnosis is
used in addition to the related Axis I or Axis II diagnosis only when the hypersomnia is
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Sleep Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition. The DSM-III-R terms "In-
somnia Related to a Known Organic Factor" and "Hypersomnia Related to a Known
Organic Factor" were applied to both Substance-Induced Sleep Disorders and those due
to a general medical condition. Two disorders based on etiology (Sleep Disorder Due
to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder) have been
created for DSM-IV. A provision to indicate insomnia, hypersomnia, parasomnia, or
mixed type has been included. In contrast to DSM-III-R, in DSM-IV this diagnosis is used
in addition to the general medical condition diagnosis only when the sleep disturbance
is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder. The DSM-III-R terms "Insomnia Related to a
Known Organic Factor" and "Hypersomnia Related to a Known Organic Factor" wereAnnotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
787
applied to both Substance-Induced Sleep Disorders and to those due to a general medical
condition. Two disorders were created for DSM-IV based on etiology (Sleep Disorder
Due to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder). A provision
to indicate insomnia, hypersomnia, parasomnia, or mixed type has been included. In
contrast to DSM-III-R, in DSM-IV this diagnosis is used instead of a substance use
diagnosis only when the sleep disturbance is sufficiently severe to warrant independent
clinical attention.
Impulse-Control Disorders
Intermittent Explosive Disorder. The DSM-III-R criterion excluding this diagnosis
in the presence of generalized impulsiveness or aggressiveness between episodes has
been deleted.
Pathological Gambling.
The criteria set has been revised to increase specificity.
Adjustment Disorders
DSM-III-R had a limit of 6 months of symptoms. This criterion has been modified in
DSM-IV to allow for symptoms lasting up to an additional 6 months after the termination
of a chronic stressor (or its consequences). Acute and Chronic specifications have been
provided to indicate presentations lasting less than 6 months and 6 months or longer,
respectively. In addition, several subtypes have been deleted (physical complaints,
withdrawal, work or academic inhibition).
Personality Disorders
Based on literature reviews, data reanalysis, and desire for compatibility with ICD-10
Diagnostic Criteria for Research, items have been modified to increase clarity and
specificity and to reduce possible gender bias.
Antisocial Personality Disorder. Based on the literature review, data reanalyses,
and field-trial results, the criteria set has been condensed, simplified, and slightly altered:
two items (irresponsible parenting and failure to sustain a monogamous relationship)
have been deleted; two items tapping consistent irresponsibility (failure to sustain
consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations) have been collapsed into one
item; and Criterion C (specifying the relationship to Conduct Disorder) has been
simplified.
Borderline Personality Disorder. An additional item for transient, stress-related
paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms has been added in DSM-IV.
Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder. This disorder has been deleted from the
Classification. A revised version has been moved to Appendix B, "Criteria Sets and Axes
Provided for Further Study."788
Appendix D
Other Conditions That May
Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
The name of this section has been changed from DSM-III-R Conditions Not Attributable
to a Mental Disorder, and a number of additional conditions have been added.
Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition. Because this category does
not constitute a mental disorder, it has been moved into the "Other Conditions That May
Be a Focus of Clinical Attention" section. The concept has been broadened to include
factors that interfere with treatment and factors that constitute health risks to the
individual. Subtypes are provided that allow specification of the particular type of
psychological factor involved.
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders. These disorders have been included
because of their importance in treatment and differential diagnosis.
Relational Problems. These problems are now named and grouped together. Two
new relational problems have been added: Relational Problem Related to a Mental
Disorder or General Medical Condition and Sibling Relational Problem.
Problems Related to Abuse or Neglect. This category has been introduced into this
section to cover physical abuse, sexual abuse, and neglect of a child and physical abuse
and sexual abuse of an adult. It is included because of the clinical and public health
significance of these conditions.
Age-Related Cognitive Decline.
coverage.
This is a new problem added to DSM-IV to improve
Bereavement. The name has been changed from DSM-III-R Uncomplicated Bereave-
ment because bereavement may cause significant impairment and complications.
Guidelines relating to the duration of symptoms and particular types of symptoms have
been provided to sharpen the boundary between Bereavement and Major Depressive
Episode.
Identity Problem. In DSM-IV, this is listed in the "Other Conditions That May Be a
Focus of Clinical Attention" section rather than being placed in the "Disorders Usually
First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence" section (as in DSM-III-R).
Religious or Spiritual Problem.
coverage.
Acculturation Problem.
coverage.
This is a new problem added to DSM-IV to improve
This is a new problem added to DSM-IV to improveAnnotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
789
New Disorders Introduced Into DSM-IV (Excluding Other
Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention)
Rett's Disorder
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder
Asperger's Disorder
Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood
Delirium Due to Multiple Etiologies
Dementia Due to Multiple Etiologies
Catatonic Disorder Due to a General Medical Condition
Bipolar II Disorder
Acute Stress Disorder
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General Medical Condition
Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Narcolepsy
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
DSM-III-R Disorders Deleted From DSM-IV or
Subsumed Into Other DSM-IV Categories
Cluttering
Overanxious Disorder of Childhood
Avoidant Disorder of Childhood
Undifferentiated Attention-Deficit Disorder
Identity Disorder
Transsexualism
Idiosyncratic Alcohol Intoxication
Passive-Aggressive Personality Disorder
Appendixes
Appendix A—Decision Trees for Differential Diagnosis. The DSM-III-R decision
tree for Organic Mental Disorders has been replaced by two separate decision trees: one
for Mental Disorders Due to a General Medical Condition and one for Substance-Induced
Disorders. Each of the other decision trees has been modified, and there is an increased
emphasis throughout DSM-IV on the differential diagnosis with Mental Disorders Due
to a General Medical Condition and Substance-Induced Disorders.
Appendix B—Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study.
has been greatly expanded to include a number of new proposals:
Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study
Postconcussional disorder
Mild neurocognitive disorder
Caffeine withdrawal
Alternative dimensional descriptors for Schizophrenia
This appendix790
Appendix D
Postpsychotic depressive disorder of Schizophrenia
Simple deteriorative disorder
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Alternative Criterion B for Dysthymic Disorder
Minor depressive disorder
Recurrent brief depressive disorder
Mixed anxiety-depressive disorder
Factitious disorder by proxy
Dissociative trance disorder
Binge-eating disorder
Depressive personality disorder
Passive-aggressive personality disorder (negativistic personality disorder)
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia
Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
Medication-Induced Movement Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
Defensive Functioning Scale
Global Assessment of Relational Functioning (GARF) Scale
Social and Occupational Functioning Assessment Scale (SOFAS)
Appendix C—Glossary of Technical Terms. Existing definitions have been re-
fined, and a number of new terms have been added.
Appendix D—Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV. This appendix has been
presented in a new format to clarify the ways in which DSM-IV differs from DSM-III-R.
Appendix E—Alphabetical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes. This listing
of categories has been revised to include the DSM-IV disorders and conditions.
Appendix F—Numerical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes. This listing of
categories has been revised to include the DSM-IV disorders and conditions.
Appendix G—ICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions and
Medication-Induced Disorders. This appendix is new for DSM-IV. It includes a
selective index of conditions classified outside the "Mental Disorders" chapter of
ICD-9-CM that are most relevant to diagnosis and care in mental health settings. In
addition, the appendix contains a list of ICD-9-CM codes for selected medications that
may cause Substance-Induced Disorders.
Appendix H—DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes. At some point within
the next several years, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services will require
the use of codes from the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems, Tenth Revision (ICD-10), for reporting purposes in the United States.
To facilitate this transition, this appendix lists the DSM-IV Classification with codes from
the ICD-10 system.Annotated Listing of Changes in DSM-IV
791
Appendix I—Outline for Cultural Formulation and Glossary of Culture-Bound
Syndromes. This appendix is provided to assist the clinician in using DSM-IV in a
multicultural environment. It is divided into two sections. The first section contains an
outline for cultural formulation designed to assist the clinician in systematically evaluating
and reporting the impact of the individual's cultural context. The second section provides
a list of "culture-bound syndromes" that denote recurrent, locality-specific patterns of
aberrant behavior and experience that may not be linked specifically to a particular
DSM-IV diagnostic category.
Appendix J—DSM-IV Contributors. This appendix contains a list of individuals
who participated in the preparation of DSM-IV.This page intentionally left blankAppendix E
Alphabetical
Listing of DSM-IV
Diagnoses and Codes
NOS = Not Otherwise Specified.
V62.3
V62.4
308.3
309-9
309.24
309.0
309.3
309.28
309.4
V71.01
995.2
780.9
300.22
305.00
303.90
291.8
291.8
291.1
291.2
291.5
291.3
291.8
291.8
Academic Problem
Acculturation Problem
Acute Stress Disorder
Adjustment Disorders
Unspecified
With Anxiety
With Depressed Mood
With Disturbance of Conduct
With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood
With Mixed Disturbance of Emotions and Conduct
Adult Antisocial Behavior
Adverse Effects of Medication NOS
Age-Related Cognitive Decline
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder
Alcohol
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
-Induced Persisting Dementia
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
-Induced Sleep Disorder
793794
303.00
291.0
291.9
291.8
291.0
294.0
294.8
305.70
304.40
292.89
292.84
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.81
292.9
292.0
307.1
301.7
293.89
300.00
299-80
314.01
314.01
314.00
314.9
299.00
301.82
V62.82
296.80
296.56
296.55
296.51
296.52
296.53
296.54
296.50
296.40
296.46
296.45
296.41
Appendix E
Alcohol (continued)
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Withdrawal
Withdrawal Delirium
Amnestic Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Amnestic Disorder NOS
Amphetamine (or Amphetamine-Like)
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
-Induced Sleep Disorder
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Withdrawal
Anorexia Nervosa
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Anxiety Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Anxiety Disorder NOS
Asperger's Disorder
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Combined Type
Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive Type
Predominantly Inattentive Type
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder NOS
Autistic Disorder
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Bereavement
Bipolar Disorder NOS
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed
In Full Remission
In Partial Remission
Mild
Moderate
Severe Without Psychotic Features
Severe With Psychotic Features
Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic
In Full Remission
In Partial Remission
MildAlphabetical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
296.42
296.43
296.44
296.40
296.66
296.65
296.61
296.62
296.63
296.64
296.60
296.7
296.06
296.05
296.01
296.02
296.03
296.04
296.00
296.89
300.7
V62.89
301.83
780.59
298.8
307.51
292.89
292.89
305.90
292.9
305.20
304.30
292.89
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.81
292.9
293.89
299.10
V71.02
307.22
307.45
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic (continued)
Moderate
Severe Without Psychotic Features
Severe With Psychotic Features
Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed
In Full Remission
In Partial Remission
Mild
Moderate
Severe Without Psychotic Features
Severe With Psychotic Features
Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode
In Full Remission
In Partial Remission
Mild
Moderate
Severe Without Psychotic Features
Severe With Psychotic Features
Unspecified
Bipolar II Disorder
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Borderline Intellectual Functioning
Borderline Personality Disorder
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Bulimia Nervosa
Caffeine
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Sleep Disorder
Intoxication
-Related Disorder NOS
Cannabis
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Catatonic Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder
Child or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior
Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
795796
305.60
304.20
292.89
292.84
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.81
292.9
292.0
294.9
307.9
312.8
300.11
301.13
293-0
780.09
297.1
290.10
294.1
294.9
294.1
294.1
290.10
294.1
294.8
290.10
290.11
290.12
290.13
290.0
290.3
290.20
290.21
301.6
300.6
311
315.4
799-9
799-9
313-9
315.2
312.9
Appendix E
Cocaine
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
-Induced Sleep Disorder
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Withdrawal
Cognitive Disorder NOS
Communication Disorder NOS
Conduct Disorder
Conversion Disorder
Cyclothymic Disorder
Delirium Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Delirium NOS
Delusional Disorder
Dementia Due to Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
Dementia Due to Head Trauma
Dementia Due to HIV Disease
Dementia Due to Huntington's Disease
Dementia Due to Parkinson's Disease
Dementia Due to Pick's Disease
Dementia Due to ... [Indicate Other General Medical Condition]
Dementia NOS
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset
Uncomplicated
With Delirium
With Delusions
With Depressed Mood
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset
Uncomplicated
With Delirium
With Delusions
With Depressed Mood
Dependent Personality Disorder
Depersonalization Disorder
Depressive Disorder NOS
Developmental Coordination Disorder
Diagnosis Deferred on Axis II
Diagnosis or Condition Deferred on Axis I
Disorder of Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence NOS
Disorder of Written Expression
Disruptive Behavior Disorder NOSAlphabetical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
300.12
300.15
300.13
300.14
302.76
307.47
300.4
307.50
787.6
307.7
307.6
302.4
315.31
300.19
300.19
300.16
300.19
307.59
625.0
625.8
302.73
302.72
302.81
302.89
302.85
302.6
302.6
300.02
305.30
304.50
292.89
292.84
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.81
292.89
292.9
301.50
307.44
302.71
300.7
313.82
312.30
797
Dissociative Amnesia
Dissociative Disorder NOS
Dissociative Fugue
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Dyspareunia (Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Dyssomnia NOS
Dysthymic Disorder
Eating Disorder NOS
Encopresis, With Constipation and Overflow Incontinence
Encopresis, Without Constipation and Overflow Incontinence
Enuresis (Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Exhibitionism
Expressive Language Disorder
Factitious Disorder
With Combined Psychological and Physical Signs and Symptoms
With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symptoms
With Predominantly Psychological Signs and Symptoms
Factitious Disorder NOS
Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood
Female Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Female Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]
Female Orgasmic Disorder
Female Sexual Arousal Disorder
Fetishism
Frotteurism
Gender Identity Disorder
in Adolescents or Adults
in Children
Gender Identity Disorder NOS
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Hallucinogen
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
Persisting Perception Disorder
-Related Disorder NOS
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Hypersomnia related to ... [Indicate the Axis I or Axis II Disorder]
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Hypochondriasis
Identity Problem
Impulse-Control Disorder NOS798
305.90
304.60
292.89
292.84
292.82
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.81
292.9
307.42
312.34
312.32
315.9
296.36
296.35
296.31
296.32
296.33
296.34
296.30
296.26
296.25
296 21
296.22
296.23
296.24
296.20
608.89
302.72
607.84
608.89
302.74
V65.2
315.1
333-90
333.1
293.9
319
317
315.31
318.0
Appendix E
Inhalant
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Persisting Dementia
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Insomnia Related to ... [Indicate the Axis I or Axis II Disorder]
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Kleptomania
Learning Disorder NOS
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent
In Full Remission
In Partial Remission
Mild
Moderate
Severe Without Psychotic Features
Severe With Psychotic Features
Unspecified
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode
In Full Remission
In Partial Remission
Mild
Moderate
Severe Without Psychotic Features
Severe With Psychotic Features
Unspecified
Male Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Male Erectile Disorder
Male Erectile Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]
Male Orgasmic Disorder
Malingering
Mathematics Disorder
00000000000000000
Movement Disorder NOS
Postural Tremor
Mental Disorder NOS Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Mental Retardation, Severity Unspecified
Mild Mental Retardation
Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder
Moderate Mental RetardationAlphabetical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
293.83
296.90
301.81
347
V61.21
995.5
333.99
333-7
332.1
333.82
333-92
305.10
292.9
292.0
307.47
V71.09
V71.09
VI5.81
300.3
301.4
V62.2
305.50
304.00
292.84
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.81
292.9
292.0
313-81
625.8
608.89
305.90
304.90
292.89
292.81
292.84
292.83
292.82
Mood Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Mood Disorder NOS
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Narcolepsy
Neglect of Child
Neglect of Child (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Neuroleptic-Induced
Acute Akathisia
Acute Dystonia
Parkinsonism
Tardive Dyskinesia
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Nicotine
Dependence
-Related Disorder NOS
Withdrawal
Nightmare Disorder
No Diagnosis on Axis II
No Diagnosis or Condition on Axis I
Noncompliance With Treatment
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Occupational Problem
Opioid
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
-Induced Sleep Disorder
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Withdrawal
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Other Female Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]
Other Male Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]
Other (or Unknown) Substance
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Delirium
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
-Induced Persisting Dementia
799800
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.9
292.0
307.89
307.80
300.21
300.01
301.0
302.9
307.47
V61.20
V61.1
312.31
302.2
310.1
301.9
299-80
V62.89
305.90
304.90
292.89
292.84
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.81
292.9
315.39
V61.1
995.81
V61.21
995.5
307.52
304.80
309.81
302.75
307.44
307.42
Appendix E
Other (or Unknown) Substance (continued)
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
-Induced Sleep Disorder
Intoxication
-Related Disorder NOS
Withdrawal
Pain Disorder
Associated With Both Psychological Factors and a General
Medical Condition
Associated With Psychological Factors
Panic Disorder
With Agoraphobia
Without Agoraphobia
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Paraphilia NOS
Parasomnia NOS
Parent-Child Relational Problem
Partner Relational Problem
Pathological Gambling
Pedophilia
Personality Change Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Personality Disorder NOS
Pervasive Developmental Disorder NOS
Phase of Life Problem
Phencyclidine (or Phencyclidine-Like)
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
—Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Phonological Disorder
Physical Abuse of Adult
Physical Abuse of Adult (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Physical Abuse of Child
Physical Abuse of Child (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Pica
Polysubstance Dependence
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Premature Ejaculation
Primary Hypersomnia
Primaiy InsomniaAlphabetical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
318.2
316
293.81
293.82
298.9
312.33
313.89
315.00
V62.81
V61.9
V62.89
299.80
307.53
295.70
301.20
295.20
295.10
295.30
295.60
295.90
295.40
301.22
305.40
304.10
292.89
292.84
292.83
292.82
292.11
292.12
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.81
292.9
292.0
292.81
313.23
309.21
318.1
V61.1
995.81
V61.21
995.5
Profound Mental Retardation
Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition
Psychotic Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
Psychotic Disorder NOS
Pyromania
Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood
Reading Disorder
Relational Problem NOS
Relational Problem Related to a Mental Disorder or General Medical
Condition
Religious or Spiritual Problem
Rett's Disorder
Rumination Disorder
Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Schizophrenia
Catatonic Type
Disorganized Type
Paranoid Type
Residual Type
Undifferentiated Type
Schizophreniform Disorder
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Abuse
Dependence
-Induced Anxiety Disorder
-Induced Mood Disorder
-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
-Induced Persisting Dementia
-Induced Psychotic Disorder
With Delusions
With Hallucinations
-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
-Induced Sleep Disorder
Intoxication
Intoxication Delirium
-Related Disorder NOS
Withdrawal
Withdrawal Delirium
Selective Mutism
Separation Anxiety Disorder
Severe Mental Retardation
Sexual Abuse of Adult
Sexual Abuse of Adult (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Sexual Abuse of Child
Sexual Abuse of Child (iffocus of attention is on victim)
801802
302.79
302.9
302.70
302.83
302.84
297.3
V61.8
780.54
780.52
780.59
780.59
307.46
307.46
300.23
300.81
300.81
300.29
307.3
307.0
307.20
307.23
307.21
302.3
312.39
300.81
300.9
306.51
290.40
290.41
290.42
290.43
302.82
Appendix E
Sexual Aversion Disorder
Sexual Disorder NOS
Sexual Dysfunction NOS
Sexual Masochism
Sexual Sadism
Shared Psychotic Disorder
Sibling Relational Problem
Sleep Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Hypersomnia Type
Insomnia Type
Mixed Type
Parasomnia Type
Sleep Terror Disorder
Sleepwalking Disorder
Social Phobia
Somatization Disorder
Somatoform Disorder NOS
Specific Phobia
Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Stuttering
Tic Disorder NOS
Tourette's Disorder
Transient Tic Disorder
Transvestic Fetishism
Trichotillomania
Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder
Unspecified Mental Disorder (nonpsychotic)
Vaginismus (Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Vascular Dementia
Uncomplicated
With Delirium
With Delusions
With Depressed Mood
VoyeurismAppendix F
Numerical
Listing of DSM-IV
Diagnoses and Codes
T
o maintain compatibility with ICD-9-CM, some DSM-IV diagnoses share the same
code numbers. These are indicated in this list by brackets.
NOS = Not Otherwise Specified.
290.0
290.10
290.10
290.10
290.11
290.12
290.13
290.20
290.21
290.3
290.40
290.41
290.42
290.43
291.0
291.0
291.1
291.2
291.3
291.5
291.8
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, Uncomplicated
Dementia Due to Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
Dementia Due to Pick's Disease
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset, Uncomplicated
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset, With Delirium
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset, With Delusions
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Early Onset, With Depressed
Mood
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, With Delusions
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, With Depressed
Mood
Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type, With Late Onset, With Delirium
Vascular Dementia, Uncomplicated
Vascular Dementia, With Delirium
Vascular Dementia, With Delusions
Vascular Dementia, With Depressed Mood
Alcohol Intoxication Delirium
Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
Alcohol-Induced Persisting Dementia
Alcohol-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Alcohol-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Alcohol-Induced Anxiety Disorder
803804
291.8
291.8
291.8
291.8
291.9
292.0
292.0
292.0
292.0
292.0
292.0
292.11
292.11
292.11
292.11
292.11
292.11
292.11
292.11
292.11
292.12
292.12
292.12
292.12
292.12
292.12
292.12
292.12
292.12
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.81
292.82
292.82
292.82
292.83
292.83
292.84
Appendix F
Alcohol-Induced Mood Disorder
Alcohol-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Alcohol-Induced Sleep Disorder
Alcohol Withdrawal
Alcohol-Related Disorder NOS
Amphetamine Withdrawal
Cocaine Withdrawal
Nicotine Withdrawal
Opioid Withdrawal
Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal
Amphetamine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Inhalant-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Opioid-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder,
With Delusions
Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Psychotic Disorder,
With Delusions
Amphetamine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Cocaine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Inhalant-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Opioid-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Psychotic Disorder,
With Hallucinations
Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Psychotic Disorder,
With Hallucinations
Amphetamine Intoxication Delirium
Cannabis Intoxication Delirium
Cocaine Intoxication Delirium
Hallucinogen Intoxication Delirium
Inhalant Intoxication Delirium
Opioid Intoxication Delirium
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Delirium
Phencyclidine Intoxication Delirium
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication Delirium
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal Delirium
Inhalant-Induced Persisting Dementia
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Persisting Dementia
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting Dementia
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder
Amphetamine-Induced Mood DisorderNumerical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
292.84
292.84
292.84
292.84
292.84
292.84
292.84
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.89
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
292.9
293-0
Cocaine-Induced Mood Disorder
Hallucinogen-Induced Mood Disorder
Inhalant-Induced Mood Disorder
Opioid-Induced Mood Disorder
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Mood Disorder
Phencyclidine-Induced Mood Disorder
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Mood Disorder
Amphetamine-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Amphetamine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Amphetamine-Induced Sleep Disorder
Amphetamine Intoxication
Caffeine-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Caffeine-Induced Sleep Disorder
Cannabis-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Cannabis Intoxication
Cocaine-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Cocaine-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Cocaine-Induced Sleep Disorder
Cocaine Intoxication
Hallucinogen-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Hallucinogen Intoxication
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder
Inhalant-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Inhalant Intoxication
Opioid-Induced Sleep Disorder
Opioid-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Opioid Intoxication
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Other (or Unknow r n) Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication
Phencyclidine-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Phencyclidine Intoxication
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Anxiety Disorder
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Sleep Disorder
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
Amphetamine-Related Disorder NOS
Caffeine-Related Disorder NOS
Cannabis-Related Disorder NOS
Cocaine-Related Disorder NOS
Hallucinogen-Related Disorder NOS
Inhalant-Related Disorder NOS
Nicotine-Related Disorder NOS
Opioid-Related Disorder NOS
Other (or Unknown) Substance-Related Disorder NOS
Phencyclidine-Related Disorder NOS
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Related Disorder NOS
Delirium Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
805806
293.81
293-82
C
293.83
293-89
293-89
293-9
294.0
294.1
294.8
294.8
294.9
294.9
295.10
295.20
295.30
295.40
295.60
295.70
295.90
296.00
296.01
296.02
296.03
296.04
296.05
296.06
296.20
296.21
296.22
296.23
296.24
296.25
296.26
296.30
296.31
296.32
296.33
296.34
296.35
296.36
i- 296.40
*— 296.40
296.41
296.42
Appendix F
Psychotic Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition],
With Delusions
Psychotic Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition],
With Hallucinations
Mood Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Anxiety Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Catatonic Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Mental Disorder NOS Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Amnestic Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Dementia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Amnestic Disorder NOS
Dementia NOS
Cognitive Disorder NOS
Dementia Due to HIV Disease
Schizophrenia, Disorganized Type
Schizophrenia, Catatonic Type
Schizophrenia, Paranoid Type
Schizophreniform Disorder
Schizophrenia, Residual Type
Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizophrenia, Undifferentiated Type
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, Mild
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, Moderate
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, Severe Without Psychotic
Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, Severe With Psychotic Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, In Partial Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic Episode, In Full Remission
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Unspecified
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Mild
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Moderate
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Severe Without Psychotic
Features
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, Severe With Psychotic
Features
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, In Partial Remission
Major Depressive Disorder, Single Episode, In Full Remission
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Unspecified
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Mild
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Moderate
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Severe Without Psychotic Features
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Severe With Psychotic Features
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, In Partial Remission
Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, In Full Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, Mild
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, ModerateNumerical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
296.43
296.44
296.45
296.46
296.50
296.51
296.52
296.53
296.54
296.55
296.56
296.60
296.61
296.62
296.63
296.64
296.65
296.66
296.7
296.80
296.89
296.90
297.1
297.3
298.8
298.9
299-00
299.10
299-80
299-80
299-80
300.00
300.01
300.02
300.11
300.12
300.13
300.14
300.15
300.16
000000
807
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, Severe Without Psychotic
Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, Severe With Psychotic
Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, In Partial Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Manic, In Full Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, Mild
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, Moderate
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, Severe Without
Psychotic Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, Severe With Psychotic
Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, In Partial Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Depressed, In Full Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed, Unspecified
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed, Mild
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed, Moderate
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed, Severe Without Psychotic
Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed, Severe With Psychotic
Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed, In Partial Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Mixed, In Full Remission
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Unspecified
Bipolar Disorder NOS
Bipolar II Disorder
Mood Disorder NOS
Delusional Disorder
Shared Psychotic Disorder
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Psychotic Disorder NOS
Autistic Disorder
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder
Asperger's Disorder
Pervasive Developmental Disorder NOS
Rett's Disorder
Anxiety Disorder NOS
Panic Disorder Without Agoraphobia
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Conversion Disorder
Dissociative Amnesia
Dissociative Fugue
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Dissociative Disorder NOS
Factitious Disorder With Predominantly Psychological Signs and
Symptoms
Factitious Disorder NOS808
300.19
300.19
300.21
300.22
300.23
300.29
300.3
300.4
300.6
300.7
300.7
300.81
300.81
300.81
300.9
301.0
301.13
301.20
301.22
301.4
301.50
301.6
301.7
301.81
301.82
301.83
301.9
302.2
302.3
302.4
302.6
302.6
302.70
302.71
302.72
302.72
302.73
302.74
302.75
302.76
302.79
302.81
302.82
302.83
302.84
302.85
302.89
302.9
Appendix F
Factitious Disorder With Combined Psychological and Physical Signs and
Symptoms
Factitious Disorder With Predominantly Physical Signs and Symptoms
Panic Disorder With Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia Without History of Panic Disorder
Social Phobia
Specific Phobia
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Dysthymic Disorder
Depersonalization Disorder
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Hypochondriasis
Somatization Disorder
Somatoform Disorder NOS
Undifferentiated Somatoform Disorder
Unspecified Mental Disorder (nonpsychotic)
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Cyclothymic Disorder
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Dependent Personality Disorder
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Borderline Personality Disorder
Personality Disorder NOS
Pedophilia
Transvestic Fetishism
Exhibitionism
Gender Identity Disorder in Children
Gender Identity Disorder NOS
Sexual Dysfunction NOS
Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Female Sexual Arousal Disorder
Male Erectile Disorder
Female Orgasmic Disorder
Male Orgasmic Disorder
Premature Ejaculation
Dyspareunia (Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Sexual Aversion Disorder
Fetishism
Voyeurism
Sexual Masochism
Sexual Sadism
Gender Identity Disorder in Adolescents or Adults
Frotteurism
Paraphilia NOSNumerical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
302.9
303-00
303-90
304.00
304.10
304.20
304.30
304.40
304.50
304.60
304.80
304.90
304.90
305.00
305.10
305.20
305.30
305.40
305.50
305.60
305.70
305-90
305.90
305.90
305.90
306.51
307.0
307.1
307.20
307.21
307.22
307.23
307.3
307.42
307.42
307.44
307.44
307.45
307.46
307.46
307.47
307.47
307.47
307.50
307.51
307.52
307.53
307.59
307.6
Sexual Disorder NOS
Alcohol Intoxication
Alcohol Dependence
Opioid Dependence
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence
Cocaine Dependence
Cannabis Dependence
Amphetamine Dependence
Hallucinogen Dependence
Inhalant Dependence
Polysubstance Dependence
Other (or Unknown) Substance Dependence
Phencyclidine Dependence
Alcohol Abuse
Nicotine Dependence
Cannabis Abuse
Hallucinogen Abuse
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Abuse
Opioid Abuse
Cocaine Abuse
Amphetamine Abuse
Caffeine Intoxication
Inhalant Abuse
Other (or Unknown) Substance Abuse
Phencyclidine Abuse
Vaginismus (Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
Stuttering
Anorexia Nervosa
Tic Disorder NOS
Transient Tic Disorder
Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder
Tourette's Disorder
Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Insomnia Related to ... [Indicate the Axis I or Axis II Disorder]
Primary Insomnia
Hypersomnia Related to ... [Indicate the Axis I or Axis II Disorder]
Primary Hypersomnia
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder
Sleep Terror Disorder
Sleepwalking Disorder
Dyssomnia NOS
Nightmare Disorder
Parasomnia NOS
Eating Disorder NOS
Bulimia Nervosa
Pica
Rumination Disorder
Feeding Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood
Enuresis (Not Due to a General Medical Condition)
809810
307.7
307.80
307.89
307.9
308.3
309-0
309-21
309.24
309-28
309-3
309-4
309-81
309.9
310.1
311
312.30
312.31
312.32
312.33
312.34
312.39
312.8
312.9
313.23
313-81
313.82
313-89
313.9
314.00
i— 314.01
1- 314.01
314.9
315.00
315.1
315.2
[- 315.31
'— 315.31
315.39
315.4
315.9
316
317
318.0
318.1
318.2
319
Appendix F
Encopresis, Without Constipation and Overflow Incontinence
Pain Disorder Associated With Psychological Factors
Pain Disorder Associated With Both Psychological Factors and a
General Medical Condition
Communication Disorder NOS
Acute Stress Disorder
Adjustment Disorder With Depressed Mood
Separation Anxiety Disorder
Adjustment Disorder With Anxiety
Adjustment Disorder With Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood
Adjustment Disorder With Disturbance of Conduct
Adjustment Disorder With Mixed Disturbance of Emotions and Conduct
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Adjustment Disorder Unspecified
Personality Change Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Depressive Disorder NOS
Impulse-Control Disorder NOS
Pathological Gambling
Kleptomania
Pyromania
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Trichotillomania
Conduct Disorder
Disruptive Behavior Disorder NOS
Selective Mutism
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Identity Problem
Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood
Disorder of Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence NOS
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Predominantly Inattentive Type
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Combined Type
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Predominantly Hyperactive-
Impulsive Type
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder NOS
Reading Disorder
Mathematics Disorder
Disorder of Written Expression
Expressive Language Disorder
Mixed Receptive-Expressive Language Disorder
Phonological Disorder
Developmental Coordination Disorder
Learning Disorder NOS
. . . [Specified Psychological Factor] Affecting . . . [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]
Mild Mental Retardation
Moderate Mental Retardation
Severe Mental Retardation
Profound Mental Retardation
Mental Retardation, Severity UnspecifiedNumerical Listing of DSM-IV Diagnoses and Codes
332.1
333-1
333.7
333.82
333-90
333-92
333.99
347
607.84
608.89
608.89
L
608.89
625.0
625.8
625.8
780.09
780.52
780.54
780.59
780.59
780.59
780.9
787.6
799-9
799-9
995.2
995.5
995.5
995.5
995.81
995.81
VI5.81
V61.1
V61.1
V61.1
V61.20
V61.21
V61.21
V61.21
V61.8
811
Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Dystonia
Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive Dyskinesia
Medication-Induced Movement Disorder NOS
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Neuroleptic-Induced Acute Akathisia
Narcolepsy
Male Erectile Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]
Male Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the Medical
Condition]
Other Male Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]
Female Dyspareunia Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition]
Female Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition]
Other Female Sexual Dysfunction Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical
Condition]
Delirium NOS
Sleep Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition],
Insomnia Type
Sleep Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition],
Hypersomnia Type
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorder
Sleep Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition],
Mixed Type
Sleep Disorder Due to ... [Indicate the General Medical Condition],
Parasomnia Type
Age-Related Cognitive Decline
Encopresis, With Constipation and Overflow Incontinence
Diagnosis Deferred on Axis II
Diagnosis or Condition Deferred on Axis I
Adverse Effects of Medication NOS
Neglect of Child (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Physical Abuse of Child (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Sexual Abuse of Child (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Physical Abuse of Adult (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Sexual Abuse of Adult (iffocus of attention is on victim)
Noncompliance With Treatment
Partner Relational Problem
Physical Abuse of Adult
Sexual Abuse of Adult
Parent-Child Relational Problem
Neglect of Child
Physical Abuse of Child
Sexual Abuse of Child
Sibling Relational Problem812
V61.9
V62.2
V62.3
V62.4
V62.81
V62.82
V62.89
V62.89
V62.89
V65.2
V71.01
V71.02
V71.09
V71.09
Appendix F
Relational Problem Related to a Mental Disorder or
General Medical Condition
Occupational Problem
Academic Problem
Acculturation Problem
Relational Problem NOS
Bereavement
Borderline Intellectual Functioning
Phase of Life Problem
Religious or Spiritual Problem
Malingering
Adult Antisocial Behavior
Child or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior
No Diagnosis on Axis II
No Diagnosis or Condition on Axis IAppendix G
ICD-9-CM Codes for Selected
General Medical Conditions and
Medication-Induced Disorders
T
he official coding system in use as of the publication of DSM-IV is the International
Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM). This
appendix contains two sections that are provided to facilitate ICD-9-CM coding: 1) codes
for selected general medical conditions, and 2) codes for medication-induced disorders.
ICD-9-CM Codes for
Selected General Medical Conditions
The codes specified for use on Axis I and Axis II of DSM-IV represent only a small
fraction of the codes provided in ICD-9-CM. The conditions classified outside the "Mental
Disorders" chapter of ICD-9-CM are also important for clinical diagnosis and manage-
ment in mental health settings. Axis III is provided to facilitate the reporting of these
conditions (see p. 27). To assist clinicians in finding the ICD-9-CM codes, this appendix
provides a selective index of those ICD-9-CM codes for general medical conditions that
are most relevant to diagnosis and care in mental health settings. ICD-9-CM offers
diagnostic specificity beyond that reflected in many of the codes that appear in this
appendix (e.g., to denote a specific anatomical site or the presence of a specific
complication). In cases in which increased specificity is noted in the fifth digit of the
code, the least specific code (usually "0") has been selected. For example, the code for
lymphosarcoma is given as 200.10 (for unspecified site), although more specificity with
regard to anatomical site can be noted in the other fifth-digit codes, for example, 200.12
lymphosarcoma, intrathoracic lymph nodes. In cases in which increased specificity is
reflected in the fourth digit of the code, this appendix often provides the "unspecified"
category (e.g., 555.9 is listed for regional enteritis; ICD-9-CM also includes 555.0 for
enteritis involving the small intestine, 555.1 for involvement of the large intestine, and
555.2 for involvement of both). Diagnostic codes for which more specificity is available
are indicated in this appendix by an asterisk (*). Clinicians interested in recording greater
specificity should refer to the complete listing of codes published in the ICD-9-CM
Diseases: Tabular List (Volume 1) and the ICD-9-CM Diseases: Alphabetic Index
813814
Appendix G
(Volume 2). These documents are updated every October and are published by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. They are available from the Superintendent
of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, as well as from a number of private
publishers.
Note: An asterisk (*) following the ICD-9-CM code indicates that greater specificity
(e.g., a specific complication or anatomical site) is available. Refer to the ICD-9-CM
Diseases: Tabular List (Volume 1) entry for that code for additional information.
Diseases of the Nervous System
324.0
Abscess, intracranial
331.0
Alzheimer's disease
437.0
Atherosclerosis, cerebral
354.0
Carpal tunnel syndrome
354.4
Causalgia
334.3
Cerebellar ataxia
850.9*
Concussion
851.80
Contusion, cerebral
359-1
Dystrophy, Duchenne's muscular
348.5
Edema, cerebral
049-9*
Encephalitis, viral
572.2
Encephalopathy, hepatic
437.2
Encephalopathy, hypertensive
348.3*
Encephalopathy, unspecified
345.10 Epilepsy, grand mal
345.40 Epilepsy, partial, with impairment of consciousness (temporal lobe)
345.50* Epilepsy, partial, without impairment of consciousness (Jacksonian)
345.00 Epilepsy, petit mal (absences)
346.20 Headache, cluster
432.0
Hemorrhage, extradural, nontraumatic
852.40* Hemorrhage, extradural, traumatic
431
Hemorrhage, intracerebral, nontraumatic
430
Hemorrhage, subarachnoid, nontraumatic
852.00 Hemorrhage, subarachnoid, traumatic
432.1
Hemorrhage, subdural, nontraumatic
852.20 Hemorrhage, subdural, traumatic
333-4
Huntington's chorea
331-3
Hydrocephalus, communicating
331.4
Hydrocephalus, obstructive
435-9
Ischemic attack, transient
046.1
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
046.0
Kuru
046.3
Leukoencephalopathy, progressive multifocal
330.1
Lipidosis, cerebral
320.9
Meningitis, bacterial (due to unspecified bacterium)
321.0
Meningitis, cryptococcal
054.72 Meningitis, herpes simplex virusICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions
053.0
321.1
094.2
047.9
346.00
346.10*
346.90*
358.0
350.1
337.1
434.9
350.2
351.0
343.9*
335.23
046.2
094.1
332.0
331.1
357.9
348.2
335.20
340
345.3
345.2
345.70
433-1
436
330.1
333.1
Meningitis, herpes zoster
Meningitis, other fungal
Meningitis, syphilitic
Meningitis, viral (due to unspecified virus)
Migraine, classical (with aura)
Migraine, common
Migraine, unspecified
Myasthenia gravis
Neuralgia, trigeminal
Neuropathy, peripheral autonomic
Occlusion, cerebral artery
Pain, face, atypical
Palsy, Bell's
Palsy, cerebral
Palsy, pseudobulbar
Panencephalitis, subacute sclerosing
Paresis, general
Parkinson's disease, primary
Pick's disease
Polyneuropathy
Pseudotumor cerebri (benign intracranial hypertension)
Sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral
Sclerosis, multiple (MS)
Status, grand mal
Status, petit mal
Status, temporal lobe
Stenosis, carotid artery, without cerebral infarction
Stroke (CVA)
Tay-Sachs disease
Tremor, benign essential
Diseases of the Circulatory System
413-9*
424.1
440.9*
414.0
426.10*
426.3*
426.4
427.5
425.5
425.4
416.9
427.9*
415.1
421.9*
428.0*
Angina pectoris
Aortic valve disorder
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerotic heart disease
Block, atrioventricular
Block, left bundle branch
Block, right bundle branch
Cardiac arrest
Cardiomyopathy, alcoholic
Cardiomyopathy, idiopathic
Chronic pulmonary heart disease
Dysrhythmia, cardiac, unspecified
Embolism, pulmonary
Endocarditis, bacterial
Failure, congestive heart
815816
Appendix G
427.31 Fibrillation, atrial
427.41 Fibrillation, ventricular
427.32 Flutter, atrial
427.42 Flutter, ventricular
455.6
Hemorrhoids
401.9*
Hypertension, essential
402.91* Hypertensive heart disease with congestive heart failure
402.90* Hypertensive heart disease without congestive heart failure
403-91* Hypertensive renal disease with failure
403-90 Hypertensive renal disease without failure
458.0
Hypotension, orthostatic
410.90 Infarction, myocardial, acute
424.0
Mitral valve insufficiency (nonrheumatic)
424.0
Mitral valve prolapse
394.0*
Mitral valve stenosis (rheumatic)
423.9* Pericarditis
443.9*
Peripheral vascular disease
451.9*
Phlebitis/thrombophlebitis
446.0
Polyarteritis nodosa
427.60* Premature beats
424.3
Pulmonary valve disease (nonrheumatic)
397.1
Pulmonary valve disease, rheumatic
427.0
Tachycardia, paroxysmal supraventricular
427.2
Tachycardia, paroxysmal, unspecified
427.1
Tachycardia, ventricular (paroxysmal)
424.2
Tricuspid valve disease (nonrheumatic)
397.0
Tricuspid valve disease, rheumatic
456.0
Varices, esophageal, with bleeding
456.1
Varices, esophageal, without bleeding
454.9
Varicose veins, lower extremities
Diseases of the Respiratory System
513.0
518.0
493.20
493-90
494
466.0
491.21
491.20
277.00
511.9*
492.8*
518.81*
505
860.4
483.0
Abscess of lung
Atelectasis
Asthma, chronic obstructive
Asthma, unspecified
Bronchiectasis
Bronchitis, acute
Bronchitis, obstructive chronic (COPD), with acute exacerbation
Bronchitis, obstructive chronic (COPD), without acute exacerbation
Cystic fibrosis
Effusion, pleural
Emphysema
Failure, respiratory
Pneumoconiosis
Pneumohemothorax, traumatic
Pneumonia, mycoplasmaICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions
482.9
481
136.3
482.30
486
480.9*
512.8*
860.0
011.9*
817
Pneumonia, unspecified bacterial
Pneumonia, pneumococcal
Pneumonia, pneumocystis
Pneumonia, streptococcus
Pneumonia, unspecified organism
Pneumonia, viral
Pneumothorax, spontaneous
Pneumothorax, traumatic
Tuberculosis, pulmonary
Neoplasms
ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for neoplasms are classified in the table of neoplasms in the
ICD-9-CM Alphabetic Index (Volume 2) according to site and degree of malignancy
(primary, secondary, in situ, benign, uncertain, unspecified). Note: For patients with a
personal history of malignant neoplasms that have been surgically removed or eradicated
by chemotherapy or radiation therapy, codes V10.0—V10.9 should be used; for specific
sites, refer to the Alphabetic Index (Volume 2) of ICD-9-CM under "History (personal)
of, malignant neoplasm."
Listed below are some of the most common codes assigned for neoplasms.
228.02
201.90*
176.9
208.01
208.00*
208.11
208.10*
200.10*
225.2
203.01
203.00
225.0
211.4
195.2
194.0
188.9
170.9*
198.5
191.9*
198.3
174.9
175.9
162.9
180.9
153-9
197.5
171.9
150.9*
Hemangioma of brain
Hodgkin's disease
Kaposi's sarcoma
Leukemia, acute, in remission
Leukemia, acute
Leukemia, chronic, in remission
Leukemia, chronic
Lymphosarcoma
Meningioma (cerebral)
Multiple myeloma, in remission
Multiple myeloma
Neoplasm, benign, of brain
Neoplasm, benign, of colon
Neoplasm, malignant, abdominal cavity, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, adrenal gland, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, bladder, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, bone, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, bone, secondary
Neoplasm, malignant, brain, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, brain, secondary
Neoplasm, malignant, breast, female, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, breast, male, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, bronchus, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, cervix, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, colon, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, colon, secondary
Neoplasm, malignant, connective tissue, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, esophagus, primary818
152.9
189.0*
155.0
197.7
162.9
197.0
196.9
172.9
183.0
157.9
185
154.1
173.9*
151.9*
186.9
193
179*
237.70*
227.0
194.0
238.4
Appendix G
Neoplasm, malignant, intestine, small, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, kidney, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, liver, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, liver, secondary
Neoplasm, malignant, lung, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, lung, secondary
Neoplasm, malignant, lymph nodes, secondary
Neoplasm, malignant, melanoma, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, ovary, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, pancreas, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, prostate, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, rectum, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, skin, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, stomach, site unspecified, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, testis, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, thyroid, primary
Neoplasm, malignant, uterus, primaiy
Neurofibromatosis
Pheochromocytoma, benign
Pheochromocytoma, malignant
Polycythemia vera
Endocrine Diseases
253.0
255.2
259.2
255.4
255.0
253-5
250.00*
250.01
253-2
241.9*
240.9*
255.1
252.0
252.1
244.9
243
256.9
253-2
259.0
259-1
257.9*
245.9*
242.9
Acromegaly
Adrenogenital disorder
Carcinoid syndrome
Corticoadrenal insufficiency
Cushing's syndrome
Diabetes insipidus
Diabetes mellitus, type 11/non-insulin-dependent
Diabetes mellitus, type I/insulin-dependent
Dwarfism, pituitary
Goiter, nontoxic nodular
Goiter, simple
Hyperaldosteronism
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism, acquired
Hypothyroidism, congenital
Ovarian dysfunction
Panhypopituitarism
Sexual development and puberty, delayed
Sexual development and puberty, precocious
Testicular dysfunction
Thyroiditis
ThyrotoxicosisICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions
Nutritional Diseases
265.0
269.3
266.2
2693
260
262
261
278.0
265.2
266.0
264.9
266.1
266.2
267
268.9
269.1
269.0
Beriberi
Calcium deficiency
Folic acid deficiency
Iodine deficiency
Kwashiorkor
Malnutrition, protein-caloric, severe
Nutritional marasmus
Obesity
Pellagra (niacin deficiency)
Riboflavin deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency
Vitamin B^ deficiency
Vitamin B 12 deficiency
Vitamin C deficiency
Vitamin D deficiency
Vitamin E deficiency
Vitamin K deficiency
Metabolic Diseases
276.2
276.3
277.3
276.5
271.3
276.9
276.6
274.9*
275.0
275.4
276.7
276.0
275.4
276.8
276.1
270.1
277.1
277.2
275.1
Acidosis
Alkalosis
Amyloidosis
Depletion, volume (dehydration)
Disaccharide malabsorption (lactose intolerance)
Electrolyte imbalance
Fluid overload/retention
Gout
Hemochromatosis
Hypercalcemia
Hyperkalemia
Hypernatremia
Hypocalcemia
Hypokalemia
Hyponatremia
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
Porphyria
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
Wilson's disease
Diseases of the Digestive System
540.9*
578.9
575.0
575.1
571.2
Appendicitis, acute
Bleeding, gastrointestinal
Cholecystitis, acute
Cholecystitis, chronic
Cirrhosis, alcoholic
819820
556
564.0
555.9
009.2
558.9
562.10
562.12
562.11
562.13
535.50*
555.9
535.50
558.9*
530.1
571.1
571.40
573-3
070.1*
070.30*
070.51*
560.39
550.90
564.1
576.2
560.9*
577.0
577.1
567.9*
530.1
530.4
530.3
532.30
532.70*
531-30*
531-70
Appendix G
Colitis, ulcerative
Constipation
Crohn's disease
Diarrhea, infectious
Diarrhea, unspecified
Diverticulitis of colon, unspecified
Diverticulitis of colon, with hemorrhage
Diverticulosis of colon, unspecified
Diverticulosis of colon, with hemorrhage
Duodenitis and gastritis
Enteritis, regional
Gastritis and duodenitis
Gastroenteritis
Esophagitis
Hepatitis, alcoholic, acute
Hepatitis, chronic
Hepatitis, toxic (includes drug induced)
Hepatitis, viral A
Hepatitis, viral B
Hepatitis, viral C
Impaction, fecal
Inguinal hernia
Irritable bowel syndrome
Obstruction, bile duct
Obstruction, intestinal
Pancreatitis, acute
Pancreatitis, chronic
Peritonitis
Reflux, esophageal
Rupture, esophageal
Stricture, esophageal
Ulcer, duodenal, acute
Ulcer, duodenal, chronic
Ulcer, gastric, acute
Ulcer, gastric, chronic
Genitourinary System Diseases
596.4
592.0
592.1
592.9
595.9*
625.3
617.9*
584.9
585
403.91
Atonic bladder
Calculus, renal
Calculus, ureter
Calculus, urinary, unspecified
Cystitis
Dysmenorrhea
Endometriosis
Failure, renal, acute
Failure, renal, chronic
Failure, renal, hypertensiveICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions
586
218.9
580.9
600
628.9*
606.9
627.9
626.9
625.2
620.2*
6l4.9*
607.3
618.9*
601.9*
593.3
598.9*
599.0
Failure, renal, unspecified
Fibroid of uterus
Glomerulonephritis, acute
Hypertrophy, prostatic, benign (BPH)
Infertility, female
Infertility, male
Menopausal or postmenopausal disorder
Menstruation, disorder of, and abnormal bleeding
Mittelschmerz
Ovarian cyst
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
Priapism
Prolapse, genital
Prostatitis
Stricture, ureteral
Stricture, urethral
Urinary tract infection (UTI)
Hematological Diseases
288.0
287.0
284.9
281.2
283.9*
283.11
280.9
283.10
283.19
281.0
282.60
286.9
288.3
282.4
287.5
Agranulocytosis
Allergic purpura
Anemia, aplastic
Anemia, folate-deficiency
Anemia, hemolytic, acquired
Anemia, hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Anemia, iron-deficiency
Anemia, nonautoimmune hemolytic, unspecified
Anemia, other autoimmune hemolytic
Anemia, pernicious
Anemia, sickle-cell
Coagulation defects
Eosinophilia
Thalassemia
Thrombocytopenia
Diseases of the Eye
366.9*
372.9
361.9
365.9
377.30*
379.50*
377.00*
369.9*
Cataract
Conjunctiva disorder
Detachment, retinal
Glaucoma
Neuritis, optic
Nystagmus
Papilledema
Visual loss
821822
Appendix G
Diseases of the Ear, Nose, and Throat
460
389-9
464.0
386.00
382.9*
462
477.9*
461.9
473.9
388.30
463
Common cold
Hearing loss
Laryngitis, acute
Meniere's disease
Otitis media
Pharyngitis, acute
Rhinitis, allergic
Sinusitis, acute
Sinusitis, chronic
Tinnitus, unspecified
Tonsillitis, acute
Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue Diseases
716.20
711.90*
714.0
733-40
710.3
722.91
722.93
722.92
733-10*
715.90*
730.20*
733-00
710.1
737.30
710.2
720.0
710.0
Arthritis, allergic
Arthritis, infective
Arthritis, rheumatoid
Aseptic necrosis of bone
Dermatomyositis
Disc disorder, intervertebral, cervical
Disc disorder, intervertebral, lumbar
Disc disorder, intervertebral, thoracic
Fracture, pathological
Osteoarthrosis (osteoarthritis)
Osteomyelitis
Osteoporosis
Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis)
Scoliosis
Sjogren's disease
Spondylitis, ankylosing
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Diseases of the Skin
704.00*
692.9*
693-0
682.9
695.1
703-0
701.4
696.1
707.0
708.0
Alopecia
Dermatitis, contact
Dermatitis, due to substance (taken internally)
Cellulitis, unspecified site
Erythema multiforme
Ingrowing nail
Keloid scar
Psoriasis
Ulcer, decubitus
Urticaria, allergicICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions
823
Congenital Malformations, Deformations,
and Chromosomal Abnormalities
749.10*
749.00*
758.3
758.0
760.71
751.3
742.3
752.7
758.7
759-82
742.1
741.90*
750.5
760.71
760.75
760.73
760.72
760.70
759-5
758.6
752.5
Cleft lip
Cleft palate
Cri-du-chat syndrome (antimongolism)
Down's syndrome
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Hirschsprung's disease (congenital colon dysfunction)
Hydrocephalus, congenital
Indeterminate sex and pseudohermaphroditism
Klinefelter's syndrome
Marfan's syndrome
Microcephalus
Spina bifida
Stenosis, congenital hypertrophic pyloric
Toxic effects of alcohol
Toxic effects of cocaine
Toxic effects of hallucinogens
Toxic effects of narcotics
Toxic effects of other substances (including medications)
Tuberous sclerosis
Turner's syndrome
Undescended testicle
Diseases of Pregnancy, Childbirth, and the Puerperium
Diagnoses associated with pregnancies can be located in the Alphabetic Index (Vol-
ume 2) of ICD-9-CM indented under "Pregnancy, complicated (by)," or "Pregnancy,
management affected by." Listed below are some of the most common conditions.
642.00* Eclampsia
643-0
Hyperemesis gravidarum, mild
643.0
Hyperemesis gravidarum, with metabolic disturbance
642.0
Pre-eclampsia, mild
642.0
Pre-eclampsia, severe
HIV Infection
Common disorders associated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection are
indexed under "Human immunodeficiency virus" in the Alphabetic Index (Volume 2)
of ICD-9-CM.
HIV is classified into three categories depending on the progression of the disease,
as follows:
042
HIV infection associated with specified conditions
043
HIV infection causing other specified conditions
044
Other HIV infections
Each category is further subdivided into fourth-digit subclassification for greater
specificity. It is customary to report one diagnostic code for the HIV disease and one824
Appendix G
code for the manifestation. Due to the complexity of the coding of HIV disease, direct
reference to the Alphabetic Index (Volume 2) of ICD-9-CM is recommended.
042.0
042.1
042.2*
042.9*
043.0*
043-1
043.2
043-3
043.9*
044.0
044.9
AIDS with specified infections
AIDS with other specified infections
AIDS with specified malignant neoplasms
AIDS, unspecified
AIDS-related complex (ARC) causing lymphadenopathy
HIV infection affecting central nervous system
ARC causing other disorders involving the immune mechanism
ARC causing other specific conditions
ARC, unspecified
HIV infection causing specified acute infections
HIV infections, unspecified
Infectious Diseases
The following codes represent ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes for infections from specific
organisms. Traditionally, codes for organisms from the 041 category are used as
secondary codes (e.g., urinary tract infection due to Escherichia co//would be coded as
599-0 [primary diagnosis] and 041.4 [secondary diagnosis]).
006.9*
112.5
112.4
112.0
112.2
112.3
112.9
112.1
099-41
001.9*
041.83
114.9*
078.1
079.2
117.5
041.4
007.1
098.2*
041.5
070.1 *
070.3*
070.51
054.9*
053-9*
115.9
036.9
079.99
487.1
Amebiasis
Candidiasis, disseminated
Candidiasis, lung
Candidiasis, mouth
Candidiasis, other urogenital sites
Candidiasis, skin and nails
Candidiasis, unspecified site
Candidiasis, vulva and vagina
Chlamydia trachomatis
Cholera
Clostridium perfrigens
Coccidioidomycosis
Condyloma acuminatum (viral warts)
Coxsackie virus
Cryptococcosis
Escherichia coli (E. coll)
Giardiasis
Gonorrhea
Hemophilus influenzae (H. influenzae)
Hepatitis, viral A
Hepatitis, viral B
Hepatitis, viral C
Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster
Histoplasmosis
Infection, meningococcal
Infection, viral, unspecified
Influenza, unspecifiedICD-9-CM Codes for Selected General Medical Conditions
487.0
041.3
088.81
084.6*
075
072.9*
041.81
041.2
041.6
041.7
071
056.9*
003.9*
135
004.9*
041.10"
041.00*
097.9*
082.9
130.9
124
131.9
002.0
081.9*
825
Influenza, with pneumonia
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Lyme disease
Malaria
Mononucleosis
Mumps
Mycoplasma
Pneumococcus
Proteus
Pseudomonas
Rabies
Rubella
Salmonella
Sarcoidosis
Shigellosis
Stapb ylococcus
Streptococcus
Syphilis
Tick-borne rikettsiosis
Toxoplasmosis
Trichinosis
Trichomoniasis
Typhoid fever
Typhus
Overdose
Additional diagnostic codes for overdose/poisoning can be located in the Alphabetic
Index (Volume 2) of ICD-9-CM in the table of drugs and chemicals, listed alphabetically
by drug in the "Poisoning" column.
965.4
Acetaminophen
962.0
Adrenal cortical steroids
972.4
Amy I/butyl/nitrite
962.1
Androgens and anabolic steroids
971.1
Anticholinergics
969.0
Antidepressants
967.0
Barbiturates
969.4
Benzodiazepine-based tranquilizers
969.2
Butyrophenone-based tranquilizers
967.1
Chloral hydrate
968.5
Cocaine
967.5
Glutethimide
969.6
Hallucinogens/cannabis
962.3
Insulin and antidiabetic agents
967.4
Methaqualone
968.2
Nitrous oxide
970.1
Opioid antagonists
965.00
Opioids826
Appendix G
967.2
968.3
969.1
965.1
970.9
962.7
Paraldehyde
Phencyclidine
Phenothiazine-based tranquilizers
Salicylates
Stimulants
Thyroid and thyroid derivatives
Additional Codes for Medication-Induced Disorders
The following are the ICD-9-CM codes for selected medications that may cause
Substance-Induced Disorders. They are made available for optional use by clinicians in
situations in which these medications, prescribed at therapeutic dose levels, have
resulted in one of the following: Substance-Induced Delirium, Substance-Induced
Persisting Dementia, Substance-Induced Persisting Amnestic Disorder, Substance-
Induced Psychotic Disorder, Substance-Induced Mood Disorder, Substance-Induced
Anxiety Disorder, Substance-Induced Sexual Dysfunction, Substance-Induced Sleep
Disorder, and Medication-Induced Movement Disorders. When used in multiaxial
evaluation, the E-codes should be coded on Axis I immediately following the related
disorder. It should be noted that these E-codes do not apply to poisonings or to a
medication taken as an overdose.
Example: 292.39 Substance-Induced Mood Disorder, With Depressive Features
E932.2 Oral contraceptives
Analgesics and Antipyretics
E935.4
E935.1
E935.6
E935.2
E935.3
Acetaminophen/phenacetin
Methadone
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Other narcotics (e.g., codeine, meperidine)
Salicylates (e.g., aspirin)
Anticonvulsants
E936.3
E936.2
E937.0
E936.1
E936.3
Carbamazepine
Ethosuximide
Phenobarbital
Phenytoin
Valproic acid
Antiparkinsonian Medications
E936.4 Amantadine
E941.1
Benztropine
E933.0 Diphenhydramine
E936.4 L-DopaAdditional Codes for Medication-Induced Disorders
827
Neuroleptic Medications
E939-2
E939.3
E939.1
Butyrophenone-based neuroleptics (e.g., haloperidol)
Other neuroleptics (e.g., thiothixene)
Phenothiazine-based neuroleptics (e.g., chlorpromazine)
Sedatives, Hypnotics, and Anxiolytics
E937.0
E939.4
E937.1
E939.5
E937.2
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepine-based medications
Chloral hydrate
Hydroxyzine
Paraldehyde
Other Psychotropic Medications
E939.0
E939.6
E940.1
E939.7
Antidepressants
Cannabis
Opioid antagonists
Stimulants (excluding central appetite depressants)
Cardiovascular Medications
E942.0
E942.2
E942.1
E942.4
E942.3
E942.6
E942.5
Antiarrhythmic medication (includes propranolol)
Antilipemic and cholesterol-lowering medication
Cardiac glycosides (e.g., digitalis)
Coronary vasodilators (e.g., nitrates)
Ganglion-blocking agents (pentamethonium)
Other antihypertensive agents (e.g., clonidine, guanethidine, reserpine)
Other vasodilators (e.g., hydralazine)
Primarily Systemic Agents
E933-0
E941.1
E934.2
E933.1
E941.0
E941.2
E933-5
Antiallergic and antiemetic agents (excluding phenothiazines, hydroxyzine)
Anticholinergics (e.g., atropine) and spasmolytics
Anticoagulants
Antineoplastic and immunosuppressive drugs
Cholinergics (parasympathomimetics)
Sympathomimetics (adrenergics)
Vitamins (excluding vitamin K)
Medications Acting on Muscles and
the Respiratory System
E945.7
E945.4
E945.8
E945.0
Antiasthmatics (aminophylline)
Antitussives (e.g., dextromethorphan)
Other respiratory drugs
Oxytocic agents (ergot alkaloids, prostaglandins)828
E945.2
E945.1
Appendix G
Skeletal muscle relaxants
Smooth muscle relaxants (metaproterenol)
Hormones and Synthetic Substitutes
E932.0
E932.1
E932.8
E932.2
E932.7
Adrenal cortical steroids
Anabolic steroids and androgens
Antithyroid agents
Ovarian hormones (includes oral contraceptives)
Thyroid replacements
Diuretics and Mineral and Uric Acid Metabolism Drugs
E944.2
E944.3
E944.0
E944.4
E944.1
E944.7
Carbonic acid anhydrase inhibitors
Chlorthiazides
Mercurial diuretics
Other diuretics (furosemide, ethacrynic acid)
Purine derivative diuretics
Uric acid metabolism drugs (probenecid)Appendix H
DSM-IV Classification
With ICD-10 Codes
A
s of the publication of this manual (in early 1994), the official coding system in
use in the United States is the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth
Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM). At some point within the next several years,
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services will require for reporting purposes
in the United States the use of codes from the International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision (ICD-10). To facilitate this
transition process, the preparation of DSM-IV has been closely coordinated with the
preparation of Chapter V, "Mental and Behavioural Disorders," of ICD-10 (developed
by the World Health Organization). Consultations between the American Psychiatric
Association and the World Health Organization have resulted in DSM-IV codes and terms
that are fully compatible with the codes and terms in the tabular index of ICD-10.
Presented below is the DSM-IV Classification with the ICD-10 codes.
NOS = Not Otherwise Specified.
An x appearing in a diagnostic code indi-
cates that a specific code number is re-
quired.
An ellipsis ( . . . ) is used in the names of
certain disorders to indicate that the name
of a specific mental disorder or general
medical condition should be inserted
when recording the name (e.g., F05.0 De-
lirium Due to Hypothyroidism).
If criteria are currently met, one of the
following severity specifiers may be noted
after the diagnosis:
Mild
Moderate
Severe
If criteria are no longer met, one of the
following specifiers may be noted:
In Partial Remission
In Full Remission
Prior History
Numbers in parentheses are page
numbers.
829830
Appendix H
Disorders Usually First
Diagnosed in Infancy,
Childhood, or Adolescence (37)
MENTAL RETARDATION (39)
Note: These are coded on Axis II.
F70.9 Mild Mental Retardation (41)
F71.9 Moderate Mental Retardation (41)
F72.9 Severe Mental Retardation (41)
F73.9 Profound Mental Retardation (41)
F79.9 Mental Retardation, Severity
Unspecified (42)
LEARNING DISORDERS (46)
F81.0 Reading Disorder (48)
F81.2 Mathematics Disorder (50)
F81.8 Disorder of Written Expression (51)
F81.9 Learning Disorder NOS (53)
MOTOR SKILLS DISORDER
F82
Developmental Coordination
Disorder (53)
F90.9
F91.8
F91.3
F91.9
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder NOS (85)
Conduct Disorder (85)
Specify type: Childhood-Onset Type/
Adolescent-Onset Type
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (91)
Disruptive Behavior Disorder
NOS (94)
FEEDING AND EATING DISORDERS
OF INFANCY OR EARLY
CHILDHOOD (94)
F98.3 Pica (95)
F98.2 Rumination Disorder (96)
F98.2 Feeding Disorder of Infancy or
Early Childhood (98)
TIC DISORDERS (100)
F95.2 Tourette's Disorder (101)
F95.1 Chronic Motor or Vocal Tic
Disorder (103)
F95.0 Transient Tic Disorder (104)
Specify if: Single Episode/Recurrent
F95.9 Tic Disorder NOS (105)
F94.0
F94.x Selective Mutism (114)
Reactive Attachment Disorder of
Infancy or Early Childhood (116)
Inhibited Type
Disinhibited Type
Stereotypic Movement Disorder (118)
COMMUNICATION DISORDERS (55)
F80.1 Expressive Language Disorder (55) ELIMINATION DISORDERS (106)
F80.2 Mixed Receptive-Expressive
.- Encopresis (106)
Language Disorder (58)
R15
With Constipation and
F80.0 Phonological Disorder (6l)
Overflow Incontinence (also
F98.5 Stuttering (63)
code K59-0 constipation on
F80.9 Communication Disorder NOS (65)
Axis III)
F98.1
Without Constipation and
PERVASIVE DEVELOPMENTAL
Overflow Incontinence
DISORDERS (65)
F98.0
Enuresis
(Not Due to a General
F84.0 Autistic Disorder (66)
Medical
Condition)
(108)
F84.2 Rett's Disorder (71)
Specify type: Nocturnal Only/Diurnal
F84.3 Childhood Disintegrative
Only/Nocturnal and Diurnal
Disorder (73)
F84.5 Asperger's Disorder (75)
OTHER DISORDERS OF INFANCY,
F84.9 Pervasive Developmental
CHILDHOOD, OR ADOLESCENCE
Disorder NOS (77)
F93.0 Separation Anxiety Disorder (110)
ATTENTION-DEFICIT AND
DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR
DISORDERS (78)
.- Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (78)
F90.0
Combined Type
F98.8
Predominantly Inattentive
Type
F90.0
Predominantly Hyperactive-
Impulsive Type
Specify if: Early Onset
. 1
.2
F98.4
Specify if: With Self-Injurious Behavior
F98.9
Disorder of Infancy, Childhood,
or Adolescence NOS (121)DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes
Delirium,Dementia,and
Amnestic and Other
Cognitive Disorders(123)
F02.4
F02.8
DELIRIUM (124)
F05.0 Delirium Due to ... [Indicate the
General Medical Condition]
(code F05.1 if superimposed on
Dementia) (127)
.- Substance Intoxication Delirium
(refer to Substance-Related
Disorders for substance-specific
codes) (129)
.- Substance Withdrawal Delirium
(refer to Substance-Related
Disorders for substance-specific
codes) (129)
.- Delirium Due to Multiple
Etiologies (code each of the
specific etiologies) (132)
F05.9 Delirium NOS (133)
DEMENTIA (133)
FOO.xx Dementia of the Alzheimer's
Type, With Early Onset
(also code G30.0 Alzheimer's
Disease, With Early Onset,
on Axis III) (139)
.00
Uncomplicated
.01
With Delusions
.03
With Depressed Mood
F02.3
F02.2
F02.0
F02.1
F02.8
.-
F02.8
Specify if: With Behavioral Disturbance
FOO.xx Dementia of the Alzheimer's
Type, With Late Onset
(also code G30.1 Alzheimer's
Disease, With Late Onset,
on Axis III) (139)
.10
Uncomplicated
.11
With Delusions
.13
With Depressed Mood
Specify if: With Behavioral Disturbance
FOl.xx Vascular Dementia (143)
.80
Uncomplicated
.81
With Delusions
.83
With Depressed Mood
Specify if: With Behavioral Disturbance
F03
831
Dementia Due to HIV Disease
(also code B22.0 HIV disease
resulting in encephalopathy on
Axis III) (148)
Dementia Due to Head Trauma
(also code S06.9 Intracranial
injury on Axis III) (148)
Dementia Due to Parkinson's
Disease (also code G20
Parkinson's disease on
Axis III) (148)
Dementia Due to Huntington's
Disease (also code G10
Huntington 's disease on Axis
III) (149)
Dementia Due to Pick's Disease
(also code G31.0 Pick's disease
on Axis III) (149)
Dementia Due to Creutzfeldt-Jakob
Disease (also code A81.0
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease on
Axis III) (150)
Dementia Due to ... [Indicate
the General Medical Condition
not listed above] (also code the
general medical condition on
Axis III) (151)
Substance-Induced Persisting
Dementia (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
specific codes) (152)
Dementia Due to Multiple
Etiologies (instead code F00.2
for mixed Alzheimer's and
Vascular Dementia) (154)
Dementia NOS (155)
AMNESTIC DISORDERS(156)
F04
Amnestic Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition]'(158)
Specify if: Transient/Chronic
.-
R41.3
Substance-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder (refer to
Substance-Related Disorders for
substance-specific codes) (161)
Amnestic Disorder NOS (163)832
Appendix H
OTHER COGNITIVE DISORDERS (163)
F06.9 Cognitive Disorder NOS (163)
Mental Disorders Due to a
General Medical Condition
Not Elsewhere Classified (165)
F06.1
F07.0
Catatonic Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (169)
Personality Change Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (171)
Specify type: Labile Type/DLsinhibited
Type/Aggressive Type/Apathetic Type/
Paranoid Type/Other Type/Combined
Type/Unspecified Type
F09
Mental Disorder NOS Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (174)
F10.3
a
The following specifiers may be applied to
Substance Dependence:
Specify if: With Physiological Dependence/
Without Physiological Dependence
Code course of Dependence in fifth
character:
0 = Early Full Remission/Early Partial Remission
0 = Sustained Full Remission/Sustained Partial
Remission
1 = In a Controlled Environment
2 = On Agonist Therapy
4 = Mild/Moderate/Severe
The following specifiers apply to
Substance-Induced Disorders as noted:
'With Onset During Intoxication/ w With Onset
During Withdrawal
ALCOHOL-RELATED DISORDERS (194)
Alcohol Use Disorders
F10.2x Alcohol Dependence" (195)
F10.1 Alcohol Abuse (196)
Alcohol-Induced Disorders
F10.00 Alcohol Intoxication (196)
Specify if With Perceptual Disturbances
F10.03 Alcohol Intoxication Delirium (129)
F10.4 Alcohol Withdrawal Delirium (129)
F10.73 Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
F10.6 Alcohol-Induced Persisting
Amnestic Disorder (161)
FlO.xx Alcohol-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions I>w
.52
With Hallucinations 1 ^'
F10.8 Alcohol-Induced Mood
Disorder 1>w (370)
F10.8 Alcohol-Induced Anxiety
Disorder I)W (439)
F10.8 Alcohol-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
F10.8 Alcohol-Induced Sleep
Disorder IW (601)
F10.9
Substance-Related
Disorders (175)
Alcohol Withdrawal (197)
Alcohol-Related Disorder NOS (204)
AMPHETAMINE (OR
AMPHETAMINE-IIKE)-
RELATED DISORDERS (204)
Amphetamine Use Disorders
F15.2x Amphetamine Dependence a (206)
F15.1 Amphetamine Abuse (206)
Amphetamine-Induced Disorders
F15.00 Amphetamine Intoxication (207)
F15.04 Amphetamine Intoxication, With
Perceptual Disturbances (207)
F15.3 Amphetamine Withdrawal (208)
F15.03 Amphetamine Intoxication
Delirium (129)
F15.xx Amphetamine-Induced
Psychotic Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions 1
.52
With Hallucinations 1
F15.8 Amphetamine-Induced Mood
Disorder 1>w (370)
F15.8 Amphetamine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
F15.8 Amphetamine-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
F15.8 Amphetamine-Induced Sleep
Disorder r ' w (601)DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes
F15.9
Amphetamine-Related Disorder
NOS (211)
CAFFEINE-RELATED DISORDERS (212)
Caffeine-Induced Disorders
F15.00 Caffeine Intoxication (212)
F15.8 Caffeine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
F15.8 Caffeine-Induced Sleep
Disorder 1 (601)
F15.9
Caffeine-Related Disorder
NOS (215)
CANNABIS-RELATED DISORDERS (215)
Cannabis Use Disorders
F12.2x Cannabis Dependence 11 (216)
F12.1 Cannabis Abuse (217)
Cannabis-Induced Disorders
F12.00 Cannabis Intoxication (217)
F12.04 Cannabis Intoxication, With
Perceptual Disturbances (217)
F12.03 Cannabis Intoxication
Delirium (129)
F12.xx Cannabis-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions 1
.52
With Hallucinations 1
F12.8 Cannabis-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
F12.9
Cannabis-Related Disorder
NOS (221)
COCAINE-RELATED DISORDERS (221)
Cocaine Use Disorders
Fl4.2x Cocaine Dependence 3 (222)
F14.1 Cocaine Abuse (223)
Cocaine-Induced Disorders
F14.00 Cocaine Intoxication (223)
F14.04 Cocaine Intoxication, With
Perceptual Disturbances (223)
F14.3 Cocaine Withdrawal (225)
F14.03 Cocaine Intoxication Delirium (129)
Fl4.xx Cocaine-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions 1
.52
With Hallucinations 1
F14.8
F14.8
F14.8
F14.8
F14.9
833
Cocaine-Induced Mood
Disorder I>w (370)
Cocaine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder r ' w (439)
Cocaine-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
Cocaine-Induced Sleep
Disorder J ' w (601)
Cocaine-Related Disorder NOS (229)
HALLUCINOGEN-RELATED
DISORDERS (229)
Hallucinogen Use Disorders
Fl6.2x Hallucinogen Dependence 3 (230)
F16.1 Hallucinogen Abuse (231)
Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
F16.00 Hallucinogen Intoxication (232)
F16.70 Hallucinogen Persisting
Perception Disorder
(Flashbacks) (233)
F16.03 Hallucinogen Intoxication
Delirium (129)
Fl6.xx Hallucinogen-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions 1
.52
With Hallucinations 1
F16.8 Hallucinogen-Induced Mood
Disorder 1 (370)
F16.8 Hallucinogen-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
F16.9
Hallucinogen-Related Disorder
NOS (236)
INHALANT-RELATED DISORDERS (236)
Inhalant Use Disorders
F18.2x Inhalant Dependence 3 (238)
F18.1 Inhalant Abuse (238)
Inhalant-Induced Disorders
F18.00 Inhalant Intoxication (239)
F18.03 Inhalant Intoxication Delirium (129)
F18.73 Inhalant-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
FIS.xx Inhalant-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions 1
.52
With Hallucinations 1834 Appendix H
F18.8 Inhalant-Induced Mood
Disorder 1 (370)
Inhalant-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
F18.8
F18.9
Inhalant-Related Disorder
NOS (242)
NICOTINE-RELATED DISORDERS (242)
Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders
F19.00 Phencyclidine Intoxication (257)
F19.04 Phencyclidine Intoxication, With
Perceptual Disturbances (257)
F19.03 Phencyclidine Intoxication
Delirium (129)
F19.xx Phencyclidine-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
51
With De i usions i
Nicotine-Induced Disorder
F17.3 Nicotine Withdrawal (244) .52
With Hallucinations 1
F19.8 Phencyclidine-Induced Mood
Disorder 1 (370)
F19.8 Phencyclidine-Induced Anxiety
Disorder 1 (439)
F17.9 F19.9
Nicotine Use Disorder
F17.2x Nicotine Dependence a (243)
Nicotine-Related Disorder
NOS (247)
OPIOID-RELATED DISORDERS (247)
Opioid Use Disorders
F11.2x Opioid Dependence 3 (248)
C
U T Opioid
^ V J Abuse
AU
/o/rv\
Fll.l
(249)
Opioid-lnduced Disorders
Fll.OO Opioid Intoxication (249)
Fl 1.04 Opioid Intoxication, With
Perceptual Disturbances (249)
F11.3 Opioid Withdrawal (250)
F11.03 Opioid Intoxication
Delirium (129)
Fll.xx Opioid-lnduced Psychotic
Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions 1
.52
F11.8
With Hallucinations 1
Opioid-lnduced Mood
Disorder 1 (370)
Opioid-lnduced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
Opioid-lnduced Sleep
Disorder I>w (601)
Phencyclidine-Related Disorder
NOS (26l)
SEDATIVE-, HYPNOTIC-, OR
ANXIOLYTIC-RELATED
DISORDERS (26l)
Sedative,
, Hypnotic, or
Anxiolytic Use Disorders
F13 2x Sed
'
ative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Dependence^ (262)
F13 1
Sedative
'
- Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Abuse (263)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders
F13.00 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Intoxication (263)
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
F13 3
Withdrawal (264)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
F13.03 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Intoxication Delirium (129)
F11.8
F13.4 Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Withdrawal Delirium (129)
F11.8
F13.73 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
F11.9 Opioid-Related Disorder NOS (255) F13 6 Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Persisting
&
PHENCYCLIDINE ^ (OR ^
[. ~.
, r (161)
A
i ^,,
Amnestic
Disorder
PHENCYCLIDINE-LIKE)-
, .
„
U12
^
^
F13.xx c Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
RELATED DISORDERS (255)
.
,
«..
, Psychotic
' , .
A
T V
Anxiolytic-Induced
Phencyclidine Use Disorders
Disorder (310)
F19.2x Phencyclidine Dependence 2 (256)
.51
With Delusions 1 ^
F19.1 Phencyclidine Abuse (257)
.52
With Hallucinations 1 ^DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes
F13-8
F13.8
F13-8
F13-8
F13-9
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Mood
Disorder 1 ^ (370)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Anxiety
Disorder w (439)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Induced Sleep
Disorder 1>w (601)
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or
Anxiolytic-Related Disorder
NOS (269)
F19.xx Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Psychotic Disorder (310)
.51
With Delusions 1 ^
.52
With Hallucinations 1 ^
F19.8 Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Mood Disorder I>w (370)
F19.8 Other (or Unknown)
Substance- Induced Anxiety
Disorder ! ' w (439)
F19.8 Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction 1 (519)
F19.8 Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Sleep Disorder ! ' w (601)
F19.9
POLYSUBSTANCE-REIATED
DISORDER
F19.2x Polysubstance Dependence 3 (270)
OTHER (OR UNKNOWN)
SUBSTANCE-RELATED
DISORDERS (270)
Other (or Unknown) Substance
Use Disorders
F19.2x Other (or Unknown) Substance
Dependence 3 (176)
F19-1 Other (or Unknown) Substance
Abuse (182)
Other (or Unknown)
Substance—Induced Disorders
F19.00 Other (or Unknown) Substance
Intoxication (183)
F19-04 Other (or Unknown) Substance
Intoxication, With Perceptual
Disturbances (183)
F19-3 Other (or Unknown) Substance
Withdrawal (184)
Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances
F19.03 Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Delirium (code F19.4 if
onset during withdrawal) (129)
F19.73 Other (or Unknown)
Substance-Induced Persisting
Dementia (152)
F19-6 Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Induced Persisting Amnestic
Disorder (l6l)
835
Other (or Unknown) Substance-
Related Disorder NOS (272)
Schizophrenia and Other
Psychotic Disorders(273)
F20.xx Schizophrenia (274)
.Ox
Paranoid Type (287)
. Ix
Disorganized Type (287)
.2x
Catatonic Type (288)
.3x
Undifferentiated Type (289)
.5x
Residual Type (289)
Code course of Schizophrenia in fifth
character:
2 = Episodic With Interepisode Residual
Symptoms (specify if: With Prominent
Negative Symptoms)
3 = Episodic With No Interepisode Residual
Symptoms
0 = Continuous (specify if: With Prominent
Negative Symptoms)
4 = Single Episode In Partial Remission (specify
if: With Prominent Negative Symptoms)
5 = Single Episode In Full Remission
8 = Other or Unspecified Pattern
9 = Less than 1 year since onset of initial
active-phase symptoms
F20.8 Schizophreniform Disorder (290)
Specify if: Without Good Prognostic
Features/With Good Prognostic Features
F25.x
.0
.1 Schizoaffective Disorder (292)
Bipolar Type
Depressive Type836 Appendix H
F22.0 Delusional Disorder (296)
Specify type: Erotomanic
Type/Grandiose Type/Jealous
Type/Persecutory Type/Somatic
Type/Mixed Type/Unspecified Type
F23.xx Brief Psychotic Disorder (302)
.81
With Marked Stressor(s)
.80
Without Marked Stressor(s)
Specify if: With Postpartum Onset
F24
Shared Psychotic Disorder (305)
F06.x Psychotic Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (306)
.2
With Delusions
.0
With Hallucinations
.- Substance-Induced Psychotic
Disorder (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
specific codes) (310)
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
F29
Psychotic Disorder NOS (315)
3 = Severe With Psychotic Features
Specify: Mood-Congruent Psychotic
Features/Mood-Incongruent Psychotic-
Features
4 = In Partial Remission
4 = In Full Remission
9 = Unspecified
F34.1 Dysthymic Disorder (345)
F32.9 Depressive Disorder NOS (350)
Specify if: Early Onset/Late Onset
Specify: With Atypical Features
BIPOLAR DISORDERS (350)
F30.x Bipolar I Disorder, Single Manic
Episode a ' c ' f (350)
Specify if: Mixed
Code current state of Manic Episode in
fourth character:
1 = Mild, Moderate, or Severe Without
Psychotic Features
2 = Severe With Psychotic Features
8 = In Partial or Full Remission
F31.0
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent
Episode Hypomanic 8 ' 11 ' 1 (350)
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent
Episode Manic a ' c ' f ' g ' h>i (350)
Code current state of Manic Episode in
fourth character:
F31.x
Mood Disorders (317)
The following specifiers apply (for current
or most recent episode) to Mood Disorders
as noted:
a
1 = Mild, Moderate, or Severe Without
Psychotic Features
2 = Severe With Psychotic Features
7 = In Partial or Full Remission
Severity/Psychotic/Remission
SpecifiersAlhronic/With Catatonic
Features/ d With Melancholic Features/ e With
Atypical Features/ With Postpartum Onset F31.6
The following specifiers apply to Mood
Disorders as noted: F31.x
g
With or Without Full Interepisode
Recovery/ h With Seasonal Pattern/With Rapid
Cycling
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS (339)
F32.x Major Depressive Disorder,
Single Episode a ' b ' c ' d ' e ' f (339)
F33.x Major Depressive Disorder,
Recurrent a ' b ' c ' d ' e ' f ' 8 ' h (339)
Code current state of Major Depressive
Episode in fourth character:
0 = Mild
1 = Moderate
2 = Severe Without Psychotic Features
Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent
Episode Mixed 3 ' c ' f ' 8 ' h ' ; (350)
Bipolar I Disorder, Most
Recent Episode
Depressed a ' b ' c ' d ' e ' f ' 8 ' hi1 (350)
Code current state of Major Depressive
Episode in fourth character:
3 = Mild or Moderate
4 = Severe Without Psychotic Features
5 = Severe With Psychotic Features
7 = In Partial or Full Remission
F31.9
F31.8 Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent
Episode Unspecified 8 ' 11 ' 1 (350)
Bipolar II Disordei*' b ' c ' d ' e ' f ' g<h ' i (359)
F34.0 Cyclothymic Disorder (363)
Specify (current or most recent
episode): Hypomanic/DepressedDSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes
F31.9
Specify type: With Depressive Features/
With Manic Features/With Mixed
Features
Specify if With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
F39
Substance-Induced Anxiety
Disorder (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
specific codes) (439)
Bipolar Disorder NOS (366)
F06.xx Mood Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (366)
.32
With Depressive Features
.32
With Major Depressive-Like
Episode
.30
With Manic Features
.33
With Mixed Features
.- Substance-Induced Mood Disorder
(refer to Substance-Related
Disorders for su bstance-specific
codes) (370)
Mood Disorder NOS (375)
Anxiety Disorders (393)
Panic Disorder Without
Agoraphobia (397)
F40.01 Panic Disorder With
Agoraphobia (397)
F40.00 Agoraphobia Without History of
Panic Disorder (403)
F40.2 Specific Phobia (405)
Specify if With Generalized
Anxiety/With Panic Attacks/With
Obsessive-Compulsive Symptoms/With
Phobic Symptoms
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
F41.9
F40.1
F42.8 Social Phobia (411)
Specify if: Generalized
Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder (417)
F43.1 Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (424)
Specify if: With Poor Insight
F43.0
F41.1
F06.4
Specify if Aeute/Chronic
Specify if: With Delayed Onset
Anxiety Disorder NOS (444)
Somatoform Disorders (445)
F45.0
F45.1
F44.x
.4
.5
.6
.7
F45.4
Somatization Disorder (446)
Undifferentiated Somatoform
Disorder (450)
Conversion Disorder (452)
With Motor Symptom or
Deficit
With Seizures or Convulsions
With Sensory Symptom or
Deficit
With Mixed Presentation
Pain Disorder (458)
Specify type: Associated With
Psychological Factors/Associated With
Both Psychological Factors and a
General Medical Condition
Specify if: Acute/Chronic
F41.0
Specify type: Animal Type/Natural
Environment Type/Blood-Injection-
Injury Type/Situational Type/Other Type
837
F45.2
F45.2
F45.9
Hypochondriasis (462)
Specify if With Poor Insight
Body Dysmorphic Disorder (466)
Somatoform Disorder NOS (468)
Factitious Disorders (471)
F68.1
Factitious Disorder (471)
Specify type: With Predominantly
Psychological Signs and Symptoms/
With Predominantly Physical Signs and
Symptoms/With Combined
Psychological and Physical Signs and
Symptoms
Acute Stress Disorder (429)
F68.1 Factitious Disorder NOS (475)
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (432)
Anxiety Disorder Due to ...
Dissociative Disorders (477)
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (436)
F44.0 Dissociative Amnesia (478)
Specify if: With Generalized Anxiety/
F44.1
Dissociative Fugue (481)
With Panic Attacks/With Obsessive-
F44.81 Dissociative Identity Disorder (484)
Compulsive Symptoms838 Appendix H
F48.1
F44.9 Depersonalization Disorder (488)
Dissociative Disorder NOS (490)
Sexual and Gender
Identity Disorders (493)
SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS (493)
The following specifiers apply to all
primary Sexual Dysfunctions:
N50.8
N94.8
N50.8
Lifelong Type/Acquired Type
Generalized Type/Situational Type
Due to Psychological Factors/Due to
Combined Factors
Substance-Induced Sexual
Dysfunction (refer to Substance-
Related Disorders for substance-
specific codes) (519)
Sexual Desire Disorders
F52.0 Hypoactive Sexual Desire
Disorder (496)
F52.10 Sexual Aversion Disorder (499)
Sexual Arousal Disorders
F52.2 Female Sexual Arousal
Disorder (500)
F52.2 Male Erectile Disorder (502)
Orgasmic Disorders
F52.3 Female Orgasmic Disorder (505)
F52.3 Male Orgasmic Disorder (507)
F52.4 Premature Ejaculation (509)
Sexual Pain Disorders
F52.6 Dyspareunia (Not Due to a
General Medical Condition) (511)
F52.5 Vaginismus (Not Due to a
General Medical Condition) (513)
Sexual Dysfunction Due to a General
Medical Condition (515)
N94.8 Female Hypoactive Sexual
Desire Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
N50.8 Male Hypoactive Sexual
Desire Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
N48.4 Male Erectile Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
N94.1 Female Dyspareunia Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition)'(515)
Male Dyspareunia Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (515)
Other Female Sexual Dysfunction
Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition] (515)
Other Male Sexual Dysfunction
Due to ... [Indicate the General
Medical Condition] (515)
Specify if: With Impaired Desire/
With Impaired Arousal/With Impaired
Orgasm/With Sexual Pain
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication
F52.9
Sexual Dysfunction NOS (522)
PARAPHILIAS (522)
F65.2 Exhibitionism (525)
F65.0 Fetishism (526)
F65.8 Frotteurism (527)
F65.4 Pedophilia (527)
Specify if: Sexually Attracted to
Males/Sexually Attracted to
Females/Sexually Attracted to Both
Specify if: Limited to Incest
Specify type: Exclusive Type/
Nonexclusive Type
F65.5
F65.5 Sexual Masochism (529)
Sexual Sadism (530)
F65.1 Transvestic Fetishism (530)
Specify if: With Gender Dysphoria
F65.3
F65.9 Voyeurism (532)
Paraphilia NOS (532)
GENDER IDENTITY DISORDERS (532)
F64.x Gender Identity Disorder (532)
.2
in Children
.0
in Adolescents or Adults
Specify if: Sexually Attracted to
Males/Sexually Attracted to Females/
Sexually Attracted to Both/Sexually
Attracted to Neither
F64.9 Gender Identity Disorder
NOS (538)
F52.9 Sexual Disorder NOS (538)DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes
Eating Disorders (539)
F50.0 Anorexia Nervosa (539)
Specify type: Restricting Type;
Binge-Eating/Purging Type
F50.2 Bulimia Nervosa (545)
Specify type: Purging Type/
Nonpurging Type
F50.9 Eating Disorder NOS (550)
Sleep Disorders (551)
PRIMARY SLEEP DISORDERS (553)
Dyssomnias (553)
F51.0
Primary Insomnia (553)
F51.1 Primary Hypersomnia (557)
Specify if: Recurrent
G47.4 Narcolepsy (562)
G47.3 Breathing-Related Sleep
Disorder (567)
F51.2 Orcadian Rhythm Sleep
Disorder (573)
Specify type: Delayed Sleep Phase
Type/Jet Lag Type/Shift Work Type/
Unspecified Type
F51.9
Dyssomnia NOS (579)
Parasomnias (579)
F51.5 Nightmare Disorder (580)
F51.4 Sleep Terror Disorder (583)
F51.3 Sleepwalking Disorder (587)
F51.8 Parasomnia NOS (592)
SLEEP DISORDERS RELATED TO
ANOTHER MENTAL DISORDER (592)
F51.0 Insomnia Related to ...
[Indicate the Axis I or Axis II
Disorder] (592)
F51.1 Hypersomnia Related to ...
[Indicate the Axis I or Axis II
Disorder] (592)
OTHER SLEEP DISORDERS
G47.x Sleep Disorder Due to ...
[Indicate the General Medical
Condition] (597)
.0
Insomnia Type
.1
Hypersomnia Type
.8
Parasomnia Type
.8
Mixed Type
839
Substance-Induced Sleep Disorder
(refer to Substance-Related
Disorders for substance-specific
codes) (601)
Specify type: Insomnia Type/
Hypersomnia Type/Parasomnia Type/
Mixed Type
Specify if: With Onset During
Intoxication/With Onset During
Withdrawal
Impulse-Control Disorders Not
Elsewhere Classified (609)
F63.8
F63.2
F63-1
F63.0
F63.3
F63-9
Intermittent Explosive
Disorder (609)
Kleptomania (612)
Pyromania (614)
Pathological Gambling (615)
Trichotillomania (618)
Impulse-Control Disorder
NOS (621)
Adjustment Disorders (623)
F43.xx Adjustment Disorder (623)
.20
With Depressed Mood
.28
With Anxiety
.22
With Mixed Anxiety and
Depressed Mood
.24
With Disturbance of Conduct
.25
With Mixed Disturbance of
Emotions and Conduct
.9
Unspecified
Specify if: Acute/Chronic
Personality Disorders (629)
Note: These are coded on Axis II.
F60.0 Paranoid Personality Disorder (634)
F60.1
Schizoid Personality Disorder (638)
F21
Schizotypal Personality
Disorder (641)
F60.2 Antisocial Personality Disorder (645)
F60.31 Borderline Personality
Disorder (650)
F60.4 Histrionic Personality Disorder (655)
F60.8 Narcissistic Personality
Disorder (658)840 Appendix H
F60.6
F60.7 Avoidant Personality Disorder (662)
Dependent Personality
Disorder (665)
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality
Disorder (669)
Personality Disorder NOS (673)
F60.5
F60.9
Other Comnditions That May
Be a Focus of Clinical
Attention (675)
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS
AFFECTING MEDICAL
CONDITION (675)
F54
. . . [Specified Psychological
Factor] Affecting . . . [Indicate
the General Medical
Condition] (675)
Choose name based on nature
offactors:
Mental Disorder Affecting Medical
Condition
Psychological Symptoms Affecting
Medical Condition
Personality Traits or Coping Style
Affecting Medical Condition
Maladaptive Health Behaviors
Affecting Medical Condition
Stress-Related Physiological
Response Affecting Medical
Condition
Other or Unspecified
Psychological Factors
Affecting Medical Condition
MEDICATION-INDUCED
MOVEMENT DISORDERS (678)
G21.0 Neuroleptic-Induced
Parkinsonism (679)
G21.0 Neuroleptic Malignant
Syndrome (679)
G24.0 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute
Dystonia (679)
G21.1 Neuroleptic-Induced Acute
Akathisia (679)
G24.0 Neuroleptic-Induced Tardive
Dyskinesia (679)
G25.1
G25.9
Medication-Induced Postural
Tremor (680)
Medication-Induced Movement
Disorder NOS (680)
OTHER MEDICATION-INDUCED
DISORDER
T88.7 Adverse Effects of Medication
NOS (680)
RELATIONAL PROBLEMS (680)
Z63.7 Relational Problem Related to a
Mental Disorder or General
Medical Condition (681)
Z63.8 Parent-Child Relational Problem
(codeZ63.1 if focus of attention
is on child) (681)
Z63-0 Partner Relational Problem (681)
F93-3 Sibling Relational Problem (681)
Z63.9 Relational Problem NOS (681)
PROBLEMS RELATED TO ABUSE
OR NEGLECT (682)
T74.1 Physical Abuse of Child (682)
T74.2 Sexual Abuse of Child (682)
T74.0 Neglect of Child (682)
T74.1 Physical Abuse of Adult (682)
T74.2 Sexual Abuse of Adult (682)
ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS THAT
MAY BE A FOCUS OF CLINICAL
ATTENTION (683)
Z91.1 Noncompliance With
Treatment (683)
Z76.5 Malingering (683)
Z72.8 Adult Antisocial Behavior (683)
Z72.8 Child or Adolescent Antisocial
Behavior (684)
R41.8 Borderline Intellectual
Functioning (684)
R41.8 Age-Related Cognitive
Decline (684)
Z63.4 Bereavement (684)
Z55.8 Academic Problem (685)
Z56.7 Occupational Problem (685)
F93.8 Identity Problem (685)
Z71.8 Religious or Spiritual Problem (685)
Z60.3 Acculturation Problem (685)
Z60.0 Phase of Life Problem (685)DSM-IV Classification With ICD-10 Codes
Additional Codes
F99
Z03-2
Unspecified Mental Disorder
(nonpsychotic) (687)
No Diagnosis or Condition on
Axis I (687)
R
69
2Q3 2
R46 8
841
Diagnosis or Condition Deferred
on Axis I (687)
No Diagnosis on A^ „ (687)
Diagnosis Deferred on Axis II (687)This page intentionally left blankAppendix I
Outline for Cultural
Formulation and Glossary of
Culture-Bound Syndromes
T
his appendix is divided into two sections. The first section provides an outline for
cultural formulation designed to assist the clinician in systematically evaluating and
reporting the impact of the individual's cultural context. The second is a glossary of
culture-bound syndromes.
Outline for Cultural Formulation
The following outline for cultural formulation is meant to supplement the multiaxial
diagnostic assessment and to address difficulties that may be encountered in applying
DSM-IV criteria in a multicultural environment. The cultural formulation provides a
systematic review of the individual's cultural background, the role of the cultural context
in the expression and evaluation of symptoms and dysfunction, and the effect that
cultural differences may have on the relationship between the individual and the
clinician.
As indicated in the introduction to the manual (see p. xxiv), it is important that the
clinician take into account the individual's ethnic and cultural context in the evaluation
of each of the DSM-IV axes. In addition, the cultural formulation suggested below
provides an opportunity to describe systematically the individual's cultural and social
reference group and ways in which the cultural context is relevant to clinical care. The
clinician may provide a narrative summary for each of the following categories:
Cultural identity of the individual. Note the individual's ethnic or cultural refer-
ence groups. For immigrants and ethnic minorities, note separately the degree of
involvement with both the culture of origin and the host culture (where applicable).
Also note language abilities, use, and preference (including multilingualism).
Cultural explanations of the individual's illness. The following may be identi-
fied: the predominant idioms of distress through which symptoms or the need for social
support are communicated (e.g., "nerves," possessing spirits, somatic complaints,
843844
Appendix I
inexplicable misfortune), the meaning and perceived severity of the individual's symp-
toms in relation to norms of the cultural reference group, any local illness category used
by the individual's family and community to identify the condition (see "Glossary of
Culture-Bound Syndromes" below), the perceived causes or explanatory models that the
individual and the reference group use to explain the illness, and current preferences
for and past experiences with professional and popular sources of care.
Cultural factors related to psychosocial environment and levels of functioning.
Note culturally relevant interpretations of social stressors, available social supports, and
levels of functioning and disability. This would include stresses in the local social
environment and the role of religion and kin networks in providing emotional,
instrumental, and informational support.
Cultural elements of the relationship between the individual and the clinician.
Indicate differences in culture and social status between the individual and the clinician
and problems that these differences may cause in diagnosis and treatment (e.g., difficulty
in communicating in the individual's first language, in eliciting symptoms or understand-
ing their cultural significance, in negotiating an appropriate relationship or level of
intimacy, in determining whether a behavior is normative or pathological).
Overall cultural assessment for diagnosis and care. The formulation concludes
with a discussion of how cultural considerations specifically influence comprehensive
diagnosis and care.
Glossary of Culture-Bound Syndromes
The term culture-bound syndrome denotes recurrent, locality-specific patterns of
aberrant behavior and troubling experience that may or may not be linked to a particular
DSM-IV diagnostic category. Many of these patterns are indigenously considered to be
"illnesses," or at least afflictions, and most have local names. Although presentations
conforming to the major DSM-IV categories can be found throughout the world, the
particular symptoms, course, and social response are very often influenced by local
cultural factors. In contrast, culture-bound syndromes are generally limited to specific
societies or culture areas and are localized, folk, diagnostic categories that frame coherent
meanings for certain repetitive, patterned, and troubling sets of experiences and
observations.
There is seldom a one-to-one equivalence of any culture-bound syndrome with a
DSM diagnostic entity. Aberrant behavior that might be sorted by a diagnostician using
DSM-IV into several categories may be included in a single folk category, and
presentations that might be considered by a diagnostician using DSM-IV as belonging
to a single category may be sorted into several by an indigenous clinician. Moreover,
some conditions and disorders have been conceptualized as culture-bound syndromes
specific to industrialized culture (e.g., Anorexia Nervosa, Dissociative Identity Disorder)
given their apparent rarity or absence in other cultures. It should also be noted that all
industrialized societies include distinctive subcultures and widely diverse immigrant
groups who may present with culture-bound syndromes.
This glossary lists some of the best-studied culture-bound syndromes and idioms ofGlossary of Culture-Bound Syndromes
845
distress that may be encountered in clinical practice in North America and includes
relevant DSM-IV categories when data suggest that they should be considered in a
diagnostic formulation.
amok A dissociative episode characterized by a period of brooding followed by an
outburst of violent, aggressive, or homicidal behavior directed at people and objects.
The episode tends to be precipitated by a perceived slight or insult and seems to be
prevalent only among males. The episode is often accompanied by persecutory ideas,
automatism, amnesia, exhaustion, and a return to premorbid state following the episode.
Some instances of amok may occur during a brief psychotic episode or constitute the
onset or an exacerbation of a chronic psychotic process. The original reports that used
this term were from Malaysia. A similar behavior pattern is found in Laos, Philippines,
Polynesia (cafardor cathard), Papua New Guinea, and Puerto Rico (maldepelea), and
among the Navajo (iich'ad).
ataque de nervios An idiom of distress principally reported among Latinos from the
Caribbean, but recognized among many Latin American and Latin Mediterranean groups.
Commonly reported symptoms include uncontrollable shouting, attacks of crying,
trembling, heat in the chest rising into the head, and verbal or physical aggression.
Dissociative experiences, seizurelike or fainting episodes, and suicidal gestures are
prominent in some attacks but absent in others. A general feature of an ataque de nervios
is a sense of being out of control. Ataques de nervios frequently occur as a direct result
of a stressful event relating to the family (e.g., news of the death of a close relative, a
separation or divorce from a spouse, conflicts with a spouse or children, or witnessing
an accident involving a family member). People may experience amnesia for what
occurred during the ataque de nervios, but they otherwise return rapidly to their usual
level of functioning. Although descriptions of some ataques de nervios most closely fit
with the DSM-IV description of Panic Attacks, the association of most ataques with a
precipitating event and the frequent absence of the hallmark symptoms of acute fear or
apprehension distinguish them from Panic Disorder. Ataques span the range from normal
expressions of distress not associated with having a mental disorder to symptom
presentations associated with the diagnoses of Anxiety, Mood, Dissociative, or Somato-
form Disorders.
bills and colera (also referred to as muind) The underlying cause of these syndromes
is thought to be strongly experienced anger or rage. Anger is viewed among many Latino
groups as a particularly powerful emotion that can have direct effects on the body and
can exacerbate existing symptoms. The major effect of anger is to disturb core body
balances (which are understood as a balance between hot and cold valences in the body
and between the material and spiritual aspects of the body). Symptoms can include
acute nervous tension, headache, trembling, screaming, stomach disturbances, and, in
more severe cases, loss of consciousness. Chronic fatigue may result from the acute
episode.
boufee delirante A syndrome observed in West Africa and Haiti. This French term
refers to a sudden outburst of agitated and aggressive behavior, marked confusion, and
psychomotor excitement. It may sometimes be accompanied by visual and auditory
hallucinations or paranoid ideation. These episodes may resemble an episode of Brief
Psychotic Disorder.846
Appendix I
brain fag A term initially used in West Africa to refer to a condition experienced by
high school or university students in response to the challenges of schooling. Symptoms
include difficulties in concentrating, remembering, and thinking. Students often state
that their brains are "fatigued." Additional somatic symptoms are usually centered around
the head and neck and include pain, pressure or tightness, blurring of vision, heat, or
burning. "Brain tiredness" or fatigue from "too much thinking" is an idiom of distress in
many cultures, and resulting syndromes can resemble certain Anxiety, Depressive, and
Somatoform Disorders.
dhat A folk diagnostic term used in India to refer to severe anxiety and hypochondriacal
concerns associated with the discharge of semen, whitish discoloration of the urine, and
feelings of weakness and exhaustion. Similar to jiryan (India), sukra prameha (Sri
Lanka), and shen-k'uei (China).
falling-out or blacking out These episodes occur primarily in southern United States
and Caribbean groups. They are characterized by a sudden collapse, which sometimes
occurs without warning but sometimes is preceded by feelings of dizziness or "swim-
ming" in the head. The individual's eyes are usually open but the person claims an
inability to see. The person usually hears and understands what is occurring around him
or her but feels powerless to move. This may correspond to a diagnosis of Conversion
Disorder or a Dissociative Disorder.
ghost sickness A preoccupation with death and the deceased (sometimes associated
with witchcraft) frequently observed among members of many American Indian tribes.
Various symptoms can be attributed to ghost sickness, including bad dreams, weakness,
feelings of danger, loss of appetite, fainting, dizziness, fear, anxiety, hallucinations, loss
of consciousness, confusion, feelings of futility, and a sense of suffocation.
hwa-byung (also known as wool-hwa-byung) A Korean folk syndrome literally
translated into English as "anger syndrome" and attributed to the suppression of anger.
The symptoms include insomnia, fatigue, panic, fear of impending death, dysphoric
affect, indigestion, anorexia, dyspnea, palpitations, generalized aches and pains, and a
feeling of a mass in the epigastrium.
koro A term, probably of Malaysian origin, that refers to an episode of sudden and
intense anxiety that the penis (or, in females, the vulva and nipples) will recede into the
body and possibly cause death. The syndrome is reported in south and east Asia, where
it is known by a variety of local terms, such as shuk yang, shook yong, and suo yang
(Chinese); jinjinia bemar (Assam); or rok-joo (Thailand). It is occasionally found in the
West. Koro at times occurs in localized epidemic form in east Asian areas. This diagnosis
is included in the Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders, Second Edition (CCMD-2).
latah Hypersensitivity to sudden fright, often with echopraxia, echolalia, command
obedience, and dissociative or trancelike behavior. The term latah is of Malaysian or
Indonesian origin, but the syndrome has been found in many parts of the world. Other
terms for this condition are amurakh, irkunii, ikota, olan, myriachit, and menkeiti
(Siberian groups); bah tschi, bah-tsi, baah-ji (Thailand); imu (Ainu, Sakhalin, Japan);
and mali-mali and silok (Philippines). In Malaysia it is more frequent in middle-aged
women.Glossary of Culture-Bound Syndromes
847
locura A term used by Latinos in the United States and Latin America to refer to a
severe form of chronic psychosis. The condition is attributed to an inherited vulnerability,
to the effect of multiple life difficulties, or to a combination of both factors. Symptoms
exhibited by persons with locura include incoherence, agitation, auditory and visual
hallucinations, inability to follow rules of social interaction, unpredictability, and possible
violence.
mal de ojo A concept widely found in Mediterranean cultures and elsewhere in the
world. Mal de ojo is a Spanish phrase translated into English as "evil eye." Children are
especially at risk. Symptoms include fitful sleep, crying without apparent cause, diarrhea,
vomiting, and fever in a child or infant. Sometimes adults (especially females) have the
condition.
nervios A common idiom of distress among Latinos in the United States and Latin
America. A number of other ethnic groups have related, though often somewhat
distinctive, ideas of "nerves" (such as nevra among Greeks in North America). Nervios
refers both to a general state of vulnerability to stressful life experiences and to a
syndrome brought on by difficult life circumstances. The term nervios includes a wide
range of symptoms of emotional distress, somatic disturbance, and inability to function.
Common symptoms include headaches and "brain aches," irritability, stomach distur-
bances, sleep difficulties, nervousness, easy tearfulness, inability to concentrate,
trembling, tingling sensations, and mareos (dizziness with occasional vertigo-like
exacerbations). Nervios tends to be an ongoing problem, although variable in the degree
of disability manifested. Nervios is a very broad syndrome that spans the range from
cases free of a mental disorder to presentations resembling Adjustment, Anxiety,
Depressive, Dissociative, Somatoform, or Psychotic Disorders. Differential diagnosis will
depend on the constellation of symptoms experienced, the kind of social events that
are associated with the onset and progress of nervios, and the level of disability
experienced.
pibloktoq An abrupt dissociative episode accompanied by extreme excitement of up
to 30 minutes' duration and frequently followed by convulsive seizures and coma lasting
up to 12 hours. This is observed primarily in arctic and subarctic Eskimo communities,
although regional variations in name exist. The individual may be withdrawn or mildly
irritable for a period of hours or days before the attack and will typically report complete
amnesia for the attack. During the attack, the individual may tear off his or her clothing,
break furniture, shout obscenities, eat feces, flee from protective shelters, or perform
other irrational or dangerous acts.
qi-gong psychotic reaction A term describing an acute, time-limited episode charac-
terized by dissociative, paranoid, or other psychotic or nonpsychotic symptoms that may
occur after participation in the Chinese folk health-enhancing practice of qi-gong
("exercise of vital energy"). Especially vulnerable are individuals who become overly
involved in the practice. This diagnosis is included in the Chinese Classification of Mental
Disorders, Second Edition (CCMD-2).
rootwork A set of cultural interpretations that ascribe illness to hexing, witchcraft,
sorcery, or the evil influence of another person. Symptoms may include generalized
anxiety and gastrointestinal complaints (e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea), weakness,
dizziness, the fear of being poisoned, and sometimes fear of being killed ("voodoo848
Appendix I
death"). "Roots," "spells," or "hexes" can be "put" or placed on other persons, causing
a variety of emotional and psychological problems. The "hexed" person may even fear
death until the "root" has been "taken off" (eliminated), usually through the work of a
"root doctor" (a healer in this tradition), who can also be called on to bewitch an enemy.
"Rootwork" is found in the southern United States among both African American and
European American populations and in Caribbean societies. It is also known as mat
puesto or brujeria in Latino societies.
sangue dormido ("sleeping blood") This syndrome is found among Portuguese Cape
Verde Islanders (and immigrants from there to the United States) and includes pain,
numbness, tremor, paralysis, convulsions, stroke, blindness, heart attack, infection, and
miscarriage.
shenjing shuairuo ("neurasthenia") In China, a condition characterized by physical
and mental fatigue, dizziness, headaches, other pains, concentration difficulties, sleep
disturbance, and memory loss. Other symptoms include gastrointestinal problems, sexual
dysfunction, irritability, excitability, and various signs suggesting disturbance of the
autonomic nervous system. In many cases, the symptoms would meet the criteria for a
DSM-IV Mood or Anxiety Disorder. This diagnosis is included in the Chinese Classifica-
tion of Mental Disorders, Second Edition (CCMD-2).
shen-k'uei (Taiwan); shenkui (China) A Chinese folk label describing marked anxiety
or panic symptoms with accompanying somatic complaints for which no physical cause
can be demonstrated. Symptoms include dizziness, backache, fatigability, general
weakness, insomnia, frequent dreams, and complaints of sexual dysfunction (such as
premature ejaculation and impotence). Symptoms are attributed to excessive semen loss
from frequent intercourse, masturbation, nocturnal emission, or passing of "white turbid
urine" believed to contain semen. Excessive semen loss is feared because of the belief
that it represents the loss of one's vital essence and can thereby be life threatening.
shin-byung A Korean folk label for a syndrome in which initial phases are character-
ized by anxiety and somatic complaints (general weakness, dizziness, fear, anorexia,
insomnia, gastrointestinal problems), with subsequent dissociation and possession by
ancestral spirits.
spell A trance state in which individuals "communicate" with deceased relatives or with
spirits. At times this state is associated with brief periods of personality change. This
culture-specific syndrome is seen among African Americans and European Americans
from the southern United States. Spells are not considered to be medical events in the
folk tradition, but may be misconstrued as psychotic episodes in clinical settings.
susto ("fright," or "soul loss") A folk illness prevalent among some Latinos in the United
States and among people in Mexico, Central America, and South America. Susto is also
referred to as espanto, pasmo, tripa Ida, perdida del alma, or cbibib. Susto is an illness
attributed to a frightening event that causes the soul to leave the body and results in
unhappiness and sickness. Individuals with susto also experience significant strains in
key social roles. Symptoms may appear any time from days to years after the fright is
experienced. It is believed that in extreme cases, susto may result in death. Typical
symptoms include appetite disturbances, inadequate or excessive sleep, troubled sleep
or dreams, feeling of sadness, lack of motivation to do anything, and feelings of lowGlossary of Culture-Bound Syndromes
849
self-worth or dirtiness. Somatic symptoms accompanying susto include muscle aches
and pains, headache, stomachache, and diarrhea. Ritual healings are focused on calling
the soul back to the body and cleansing the person to restore bodily and spiritual balance.
Different experiences of susto may be related to Major Depressive Disorder, Posttrau-
matic Stress Disorder, and Somatoform Disorders. Similar etiological beliefs and symptom
configurations are found in may parts of the world.
taijin kyofusho A culturally distinctive phobia in Japan, in some ways resembling
Social Phobia in DSM-IV. This syndrome refers to an individual's intense fear that his or
her body, its parts or its functions, displease, embarrass, or are offensive to other people
in appearance, odor, facial expressions, or movements. This syndrome is included in
the official Japanese diagnostic system for mental disorders.
zar A general term applied in Ethiopia, Somalia, Egypt, Sudan, Iran, and other North
African and Middle Eastern societies to the experience of spirits possessing an individual.
Persons possessed by a spirit may experience dissociative episodes that may include
shouting, laughing, hitting the head against a wall, singing, or weeping. Individuals may
show apathy and withdrawal, refusing to eat or carry out daily tasks, or may develop a
long-term relationship with the possessing spirit. Such behavior is not considered
pathological locally.This page intentionally left blankAppendix I
DSM-IV Contributors
B
ecause DSM-IV is meant to be used by a diverse group of mental health
professionals in a variety of settings, the Task Force on DSM-IV and the Work
Groups solicited and encouraged the participation of a wide range of professionals to
serve as advisers to the Task Force and individual Work Groups. Advisers included
individuals from other health associations; clinical practitioners; researchers; forensic
specialists; experts on gender, age, and cultural issues; and international experts.
Advisory groups identified pertinent questions regarding each diagnosis; developed and
critiqued literature reviews, text, and criteria; and participated in field-trial and data-
reanalysis projects. The Task Force on DSM-IV and the Work Group members extend
their appreciation and heartfelt thanks to the individuals and organizations who
contributed so generously of their time and expertise.
Work Group Advisers
Anxiety Disorders Advisers
W. Stewart Agras, M.D.
Hagop Akiskal, M.D.
Lauren Bersh Alloy, M.D.
James Barbie, M.D.
Aaron T. Beck, M.D.
Jean Beckham, Ph.D.
Deborah C. Beidel, Ph.D.
Istvan Bitter, M.D.
Arthurs. Blank, Jr., M.D.
Thomas D. Borkovec, Ph.D.
Loretta E. Braxton, Ph.D.
Naomi Breslau, Ph.D.
Elizabeth Brett, Ph.D.
Evelyn Bromet, Ph.D.
Timothy A. Brown, Psy.D.
Allan Burstein, M.D.
David M. Clark, Ph.D.
Lee Anna Clark, Ph.D.
Deborah S. Cowley, M.D.
Michelle G. Craske, Ph.D.
Raymond R. Crowe, M.D.
George C. Curtis, M.D.
Yael Danieli, Ph.D.
Joseph A. Deltito, M.D.
Peter A. DiNardo, Ph.D.
Keith Stephen Dobson, Ph.D.
Spencer Eth, M.D.
John Fairbank, Ph.D.
Brian Fallon, M.D.
Charles Figley, Ph.D.
Stephen M. Ford, M.D.
Ellen Frank, Ph.D.
Mathew Friedman, M.D.
Kishore Gadde, M.D.
Ronald Ganellen, Ph.D.
Michael Gelder, M.D.
Earl Ciller, M.D.
851852
Appendix J
Wayne Goodman, M.D.
Tana Grady, M.D.
Bonnie Green, Ph.D.
Peter J. Guarnaccia, Ph.D.
Richard Heimberg, Ph.D.
John E. Helzer, M.D.
Judith Herman, M.D.
Rudolf Hoehn-Saric, M.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Eric Hollander, M.D.
Mardi Horowitz, M.D.
Tom Insel, M.D.
Michael Jenike, M.D.
Wayne Katon, M.D.
Heinz Katschnig, M.D.
Terrance Keane, Ph.D.
Dean Kilpatrick, Ph.D.
Laurence Kirmayer, M.D.
Donald F. Klein, M.D.
Stuart Kleinman, M.D.
Gerald L. Klerman, M.D. (deceased)
Lawrence Kolb, M.D.
Michael J. Kozak, Ph.D.
Cynthia Last, Ph.D.
Bernard Lerer, M.D.
Andrew Levin, M.D.
R. Bruce Lydiard, M.D., Ph.D.
Salvatore Mannuzza, Ph.D.
John S. March, M.D.
Andrew Mathews, Ph.D.
Matig Mavissakalian, M.D.
Alexander McFarlane, M.B., B.S. (Hons),
M.D.
Richard McNally, M.D.
Charles A. Meyer, Jr., M.D.
Karla Moras, Ph.D.
Dennis Munjack, M.D.
Lars Goran 6st, Ph.D.
Howard Parad, D.S.W.
Kok Lee Peng, M.D.
Roger Pitman, M.D.
Robert Pynoos, M.D.
Ronald M. Rapee, Ph.D.
Beverley Raphael, M.D.
Steven Rasmussen, M.D.
James Reich, M.D., M.P.H.
Patricia Resnick, Ph.D.
Jeffrey C. Richards, Ph.D.
Karl Rickels, M.D.
John H. Riskind, Ph.D.
Sir Martin Roth, M.D.
Barbara Rothbaum, Ph.D.
Peter Roy-Byrne, M.D.
Philip Saigh, Ph.D.
Paul Salkovskis, Ph.D.
William C. Sanderson, Ph.D.
Franklin Schneier, M.D.
Javaid Sheikh, M.D.
Zahava Soloman, M.D.
Susan Solomon, Ph.D.
Larry H. Strasburger, M.D., Ph.D.
Suzanne Sutherland, M.D.
Richard Swinson, M.D.
Lenore Terr, M.D.
Peter Trower, Ph.D.
Samuel M. Turner, Ph.D.
Thomas Uhde, M.D.
David Watson, Ph.D.
Hans Ulrich Wittchen, Ph.D.
Patti Zetlin, M.S.W.
Richard Zinbarg, Ph.D.
Joseph Zohar, M.D.
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic
and Other Cognitive Disorders
Advisers
Frank Benson, M.D.
John Breitner, M.D.
Steve Buckingham, D.S.W.
Nelson Butters, Ph.D.
Steven Cohen-Cole, M.D.
Jeffrey Lee Cummings, M.D.
Horacio Fabrega, Jr., M.D.
Barry Fogel, M.D.
Robert P. Granacher, M.D., Ph.D.
Robert C. Green, M.D.
Robert Heaton, M.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
K. Ranga Rama Krishnan, M.D.
Keh-Ming Lin, M.D.
Zbigniew Lipowski, M.D.
Alwyn Lishman, M.D.
Richard Mayeux, M.D.
Marsel Mesulam, M.D.
Vernon Neppe, M.D.
Barry Reisberg, M.D.
Sir Martin Roth, M.D.
David Rubinow, M.D.DSM-IV Contributors
Randy Schiffer, M.D.
Michael Taylor, M.D.
Linda Teri, Ph.D.
Allan Yozawitz, M.D.
Stuart C. Yudofsky, M.D.
Michael Zaudig, M.D.
Disorders Usually First Diagnosed
During Infancy, Childhood, or
Adolescence Advisers
Marc Amaya, M.D.
Lisa Amaya-Jackson, M.D.
Adrian Angold, M.B., B.S., M.R.C.Psych.
William Arroyo, M.D.
Robert F. Asarnow, Ph.D.
George Bailey, M.D.
Joseph Biederman, M.D.
Ray Blanchard, Ph.D.
Lewis M. Bloomingdale, M.D.
John Bradford, M.D.
Joel Bregman, M.D.
Glorissa Canino, Ph.D.
Ian Alberto Canino, M.D.
Iris Chagwedera, Ph.D.
Dante Cicchetti, Ph.D.
Susan Coates, Ph.D.
Patricia Cohen, Ph.D.
C. Keith Conners, Ph.D.
Jane Costello, M.D.
Charles Davenport, M.D.
Robert Delong, M.D.
Martha Denckla, M.D.
Park Elliott Dietz, M.D., Ph.D.
Craig Donnelly, M.D.
Felton Earls, M.D.
L. Erlenmeyer-Kimling, Ph.D.
Jack Fletcher, Ph.D.
Steven Forness, Ed.D.
Richard Green, M.D., J.D.
Laurence Greenhill, M.D.
Stanley Greenspan, M.D.
Richard L. Gross, M.D.
Robert Harmon, M.D.
Lily Hechtman, M.D.
Margaret Hertzig, M.D.
James J. Hudziak, M.D.
Peter Jensen, M.D.
Gloria Johnson-Powell, M.D.
Robert King, M.D.
853
Mindy Krotick, M.A.
Cynthia Last, Ph.D.
James Leckman, M.D.
James Lee, M.D.
Stephen Levine, M.D.
John Lochman, M.D.
Catherine Lord, Ph.D.
John S. March, M.D.
James McKinney, Ph.D.
Jon Meyer, M.D.
Heino F.L. Meyer-Bahlburg, Dr., rer., nat.
Juan Enrique Mezzich, M.D., Ph.D.
Klaus Minde, M.D.
David Mrazek, M.D.
Joy Osofsky, Ph.D.
Ira Pauly, M.D.
Gary Peterson, M.D.
Sally Provence, M.D.
Joaquim Puig-Antich, M.D. (deceased)
Kathleen May Quinn, M.D.
Steven Rasmussen, M.D.
Robert J. Reichler, M.D.
Mark A. Riddle, M.D.
Edward Ritvo, M.D.
Richard Rosner, M.D.
Byron Rourke, Ph.D.
Diane H. Schetky, M.D.
Eric Schopler, Ph.D.
Rourke Schopler, Ph.D.
Arthur Shapiro, M.D.
Theodore Shapiro, M.D.
Bennet Shaywitz, M.D.
Larry Silver, M.D.
Robert Stoller, M.D. (deceased)
Alan Stone, M.D.
Peter Szatmari, M.D.
Ludwig Szymanski, M.D.
Paula Tallal, Ph.D.
Kenneth Towbin, M.D.
Luke Tsai, M.D.
Kenneth Jay Weiss, M.D.
Myrna M. Weissman, Ph.D.
Elizabeth Weller, M.D.
Karen Wells, Ph.D.
Agnes Whittaker, M.D.
Janet B. W. Williams, D.S.W.
Ronald Winchel, M.D.
Allan Yozawitz, M.D.
Kenneth J. Zucker, Ph.D.854
Appendix J
Barry Zuckerman, M.D.
Bernard Zuger, M.D.
Eating Disorders Advisers
W. Stewart Agras, M.D.
Arnold Anderson; M.D.
William Berman, Ph.D.
Peter Beumont, M.D.
Barton J. Blinder, M.D.
Susan Jane Blumenthal, M.D.
LCDR James M. Blunt
Harry A. Brandt, M.D.
Timothy D. Brewerton, M.D.
Kelly Brownell, Ph.D.
Gabrielle A. Carlson, M.D.
Eva Carr, M.A.
Regina Casper, M.D.
Leslie Citrome, M.D.
Peter J. Cooper, M.D.
Arthur H. Crisp, M.D.
Maria DaCosta, M.D.
Bonnie Dansky, Ph.D.
Michael Devlin, M.D.
Adam Drewnowski, Ph.D.
Hike Eckert, M.D.
Robert Edelman, M.D.
Christopher Fairburn, M.D.
Madeline Fernstrom, Ph.D.
Manfred Fichter, M.D.
Martine Flament, M.D.
Henri Flikier, A.C.S.W.
Victor Fornari, M.D.
Chris Freeman, M.D.
David M. Garner, Ph.D.
Philip W. Gold, M.D.
Harry E. Gwirtsman, M.D.
Deborah Hasin, Ph.D.
C. Peter Herman, Ph.D.
David Herzog, M.D.
Jules Hirsch, M.D.
Hans W. Hoek, M.D., Ph.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
L.K. George Hsu, M.D.
James I. Hudson, M.D.
Laurie Humphries, M.D.
Philippe Jeammet, M.D.
David C. Jimerson, M.D.
Craig Johnson, Ph.D.
Ross S. Kalucy, M.D.
Jack L. Katz, M.D.
Walter Kaye, M.D.
Justin Kenardy, Ph.D.
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
Sid Kennedy, M.D.
Dean Kilpatrick, Ph.D.
Dean D. Krahn, M.D.
Sing Lee, M.R.C.Psych.
Pierre Leichner, M.D.
Harold Leitenberg, Ph.D.
Jill Leolbonne, M.D.
Gloria Leon, Ph.D.
Katharine Loeb, B.A.
Alexander R. Lucas, M.D.
Marsha Marcus, Ph.D.
Valerie Rae McClain, B.A.
Juan Enrique Mezzich, M.D., Ph.D.
Julian Morrow, Ph.D.
Claes Norring, Dr.Med.Sc.
Patrick O'Conner, Ph.D.
Marion P. Olmstead, Ph.D.
Carol B. Peterson, Ph.D.
Karl Pirke, M.D.
Janet Polivy, Ph.D.
Harrison Pope, M.D.
Charles Portney, M.D.
Albert M. Powell, M.D.
Raymond Prince, M.D.
Richard Pyle, M.D.
Ellen Raynes, Psy.D.
Rory Richardson, M.A.
Cheryl Ritenbaugh, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Paul Robinson, M.D.
Judith Rodin, Ph.D.
Barbara J. Rolls, Ph.D.
James Rosen, Ph.D.
Gerald Russell, M.D.
Ronna Saunders, L.C.S.W.
Joseph Silverman, M.D.
Michael Strober, Ph.D.
Albert J. Stunkard, M.D.
Allan Sugarman, M.D.
George Szmukler, M.D.
Sten Theander, M.D.
Suellen Thomsen, B.A.
David Tobin, Ph.D.
Walter Vandereycken, M.D.
David Veale, M.R.C.Psych.
Kelly Bemis Vitousek, Ph.D.DSM-TV Contributors
Thomas Wadden, Ph.D.
David Waller, M.D.
Winny Weeda-Mannak, Ph.D.
Herbert Weiner, M.D.
Mitchel Weiss, M.D., Ph.D.
David Wheadon, M.D.
Rena Wing, M.D.
Steve Wonderlich, Ph.D.
Susan Wooley, Ph.D.
Wayne Wooley, Ph.D.
Judith Wurtman, Ph.D.
Joel Yager, M.D.
Susan Yanovski, M.D.
Preston Zucker, M.D.
Mood Disorders Advisers
Hagop Akiskal, M.D.
Jay Amsterdam, M.D.
Jules Angst, M.D.
Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D.
Marie Asberg, M.D.
David Avery, M.D.
Aaron T. Beck, M.D.
James C. Beck, M.D.
Dan Blazer, M.D.
Charles Bowden, M.D.
Ian Brockington, M.D.
Susan B. Campbell, Ph.D.
Dennis P. Cantwell, M.D.
Bernard J. Carroll, M.D. Ph.D.
Giovanni Cassano, M.D.
Paul Chodoff, M.D.
William Coryell, M.D.
John L. Cox, D.M.
Jonathan Davidson, M.D.
John Davis, M.D.
Christine Dean, M.D.
Robert Delong, M.D.
J. Raymond DePaulo, M.D.
Jean Endicott, Ph.D.
Cecile Ernst, M.D.
Max Fink, M.D.
Leslie M. Forman, M.D.
Linda George, Ph.D.
Robert Gerner, M.D.
Elliot Gershon, M.D.
William Goldstein, M.D.
Byron Good, Ph.D.
Frederick K. Goodwin, M.D.
Thomas Gordon Gutheil, M.D.
Wilma M. Harrison, M.D.
Jonathon M. Himmelhoch, M.D.
Robert M. A. Hirschfeld, M.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Charles Holzer III, M.D.
Robert Howland, M.D.
Emily Hoyer, B.A.
James Jefferson, M.D.
Ira Katz, M.D.
Gabor Keitner, M.D.
Robert Kendell, M.D.
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
Daniel Klein, Ph.D.
Gerald L. Klerman, M.D. (deceased)
James Kocsis, M.D.
Harold Koenig, M.D.
Ernest Kovacs, M.D.
Helena Kraemer, Ph.D.
K. Ranga Rama Krishnan, M.D.
Andrew Krystal, M.D.
David J. Kupfer, M.D.
Jacqueline LaLive, M.D.
Peter Lewinshon, Ph.D.
Wolfgang Maier, M.D.
John Mann, M.D.
Spero Manson, Ph.D.
James P. McCullough, Ph.D.
Patrick McGrath, M.D.
Julien Mendelewicz, M.D.
Kathleen Merikangas, Ph.D.
Robert Michels, M.D.
Ivan Miller, Ph.D.
Phyllis Nash, D.S.W.
Michael O'Hara, Ph.D.
David Osser, M.D.
Gordon Parker, M.D.
Barbara Parry, M.D.
Eugene Paykel, M.D.
Kok Lee Peng, M.D.
Fredrick Petty, M.D., Ph.D.
Robert M. Post, M.D.
Daniel Purdy, A.B.
Frederic Quitkin, M.D.
Judith G. Rabkin, Ph.D.
Ted Reich, M.D.
Richard Ries, M.D.
Donald Robinson, M.D.
Holly Rogers, M.D.
855856
Appendix J
Jerrold F. Rosenbaum, M.D.
Norman Rosenthal, M.D.
Anthony Rothschild, M.D.
Alec Roy, M.D.
Cordelia Russell, B.A.
Alan Schatzberg, M.D.
Jan Scott, Ph.D.
Tracie Shea, Ph.D.
Anne Simmons, Ph.D.
Stuart Sotsky, M.D.
David Steffens, M.D.
Jonathan Stewart, M.D.
Larry H. Strasburger, M.D., Ph.D.
Trisha Suppes, M.D., Ph.D.
Michael Thase, M.D.
Richard Weiner, M.D.
Jan Weissenburger, M.A.
Myrna M. Weissman, Ph.D.
Kenneth Wells, M.D.
Peter C. Whybrow, M.D.
George Winokur, M.D.
Anna Wirz-Justice, Ph.D.
Hans Ulrich Wittchen, Ph.D.
Multiaxial Issues Advisers
Jonathan F. Borus, M.D.
Kathleen Buckwalter, Ph.D.
Fredric Busch, M.D.
Eric Douglas Caine, M.D.
Thomas Carli, M.D.
Arnold Cooper, M.D.
Paul Crits-Christoph, M.D.
Susan Fine, M.A.
PaulJ. Fink, M.D.
Jack Froom, M.D.
Akira Fujinawa, M.D.
Daniel W. Gillette, M.D.
Robert Glick, M.D.
Byron Good, Ph.D.
Richard E. Gordon, M.D., Ph.D.
Barry Gurland, M.D.
Herta A. Guttman, M.D.
Richard Hall, M.D.
Mardi Horowitz, M.D.
Charles Hughes, Ph.D.
T. Byram Karasu, M.D.
James Karls, D.S.W.
Florence Kaslow, Ph.D.
Otto Kernberg, M.D.
Gerald L. Klerman, M.D. (deceased)
Thomas Kuhlman, Ph.D.
Powell Lawton, Ph.D.
Joshua D. Lipsitz, Ph.D.
Christine Lloyd, M.D.
Lester Luborsky, M.D.
Roger Mackinnon, M.D.
Carolyn Mazure, Ph.D.
Theodore Millon, Ph.D.
Glen Pearson, M.D.
J. Christopher Perry, M.D.
George H. Pollock, M.D.
Joseph M. Rey, Ph.D.
Lawrence Rockland, M.D.
Geoffrey Shrader, M.D.
Ronald C. Simons, M.D., M.A.
Alan Stoudemire, M.D.
James J. Strain, M.D.
John S. Strauss, M.D.
Christopher Tennant, M.D.
Mary Durand Thomas, R.N., Ph.D.
Virginia Tilden, R.N., D.N.Sc.
George Vaillant, M.D.
Holly Skodol Wilson, R.N., Ph.D.
Ronald M. Wintrob, M.D.
Lyman C. Wynne, M.D., Ph.D.
Personality Disorders Advisers
Gerald Adler, M.D.
Salman Akhtar, M.D.
Hagop Akiskal, M.D.
Norimassa Akuta, M.D.
Renato Daniel Alarcon, M.D., M.P.H.
Arthur Alterman, Ph.D.
Antonio Andreoli, M.D.
Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D.
Beng-Ake Armelius, Ph.D.
Lorna Smith Benjamin, Ph.D.
Mark Berelowitz, M.D.
Jack Brandes, M.D.
Remi Cadoret, M.D.
Paul Chodoff, M.D.
Lee Anna Clark, Ph.D.
John Clarkin, Ph.D.
C. Robert Cloninger, M.D.
Jerome Cohen, D.S.W.
Karyl Cole, M.D.
Arnold Cooper, M.D.
Paul Costa, Ph.D.DSM-IV Contributors
Alv A. Dahl, M.D.
Carl Eisdorfer, M.D., Ph.D., M.S.W
Edward F. Foulks, M.D., Ph.D.
John Frosch, M.D.
William Goldstein, M.D.
Seymour L. Halleck, M.D.
Robert Hare, Ph.D.
Judith Herman, M.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Mardi Horowitz, M.D.
Stephen W. Hurt, Ph.D.
Steven Hyler, M.D.
Karen John, M.D.
Patricia Judd, M.S.W.
Charles Kaelber, M.D.
Oren Kalus, M.D.
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
Otto Kernberg, M.D.
Donald Kiesler, Ph.D.
Daniel Klein, Ph.D.
Donald F. Klein, M.D.
Arthur Kleinman, M.D., Ph.D.
Harold Koenigsberg, M.D.
Jerome Kroll, M.D.
Marsha Linehan, Ph.D.
Paul Links, M.D.
John Lion, M.D.
W. John Livesley, M.D.
Armand Loranger, Ph.D.
Spencer Lyerly, Ph.D.
Michael Lyons, Ph.D.
K. Roy MacKenzie, M.D.
Roger Mackinnon, M.D.
Nikolas Manos, M.D.
James Masterson, M.D.
Robert McCrae, Ph.D.
Thomas McGlashan, M.D.
Robert David Miller, M.D., Ph.D.
Leslie Morey, Ph.D.
Ole Mors, M.D.
Kazuhisa Nakao, M.D.
H. George Nurnberg, M.D.
John Oldham, M.D.
Yutaka Ono, M.D.
Stephen L. Oxley, Ph.D.
Joel Paris, M.D.
Gordon Parker, M.D.
Glen Pearson, M.D.
Kok Lee Peng, M.D.
J. Christopher Perry, M.D.
Ethel Person, M.D.
Katharine Anne Phillips, M.D.
Paul Pilkonis, Ph.D.
Harrison Pope, M.D.
Charles Pull, M.D.
James Reich, M.D., M.P.H.
William H. Reid, M.D.
Lee Robins, Ph.D.
Elsa Ronningstam, Ph.D.
Loren Henry Roth, M.D.
Robert Ruegg, M.D.
Pedro Ruiz, M.D.
A. John Rush, M.D.
Marvin Schwartz, M.D.
Richard Selman, M.D.
Kenneth Silk, M.D.
Bennett Simon, M.D.
Richard C. Simons, M.D.
Erik Simonsen, M.D.
Andrew Edward Skodol II, M.D.
Paul Harris Soloff, M.D.
Stephen Sternbach, M.D.
Alan Stone, M.D.
Michael Stone, M.D.
Lawrence Tancredi, M.D.
Alex Tarnopolsky, M.D.
Auke Tellegen, Ph.D.
Pekka Tienari, M.D.
Svenn Torgensen, M.D.
Joseph Triebwasser, M.D.
Robert Tringone, Ph.D.
Timothy Trull, Ph.D.
Peter Tyrer, M.D.
Lindsey Tweed, M.D.
T. Bedirhan Ustun, M.D.
Per Vaglum, M.D.
Sonya Vaglum, M.D.
George Vaillant, M.D.
Lenore B. Walker, Ed.D.
Dermot Walsh, M.B.
Jack Wiggins, Ph.D.
Jerry Wiggins, Ph.D.
Mary C. Zanarini, Ed.D.
Premenstrual Dysphoric
Disorder Advisers
Elissa P. Benedek, M.D.
Sarah Berga, M.D.
857858
Appendix J
Susan Jane Blumenthal, M.D.
Leah Joan Dickstein, M.D.
Ellen W. Freeman, Ph.D.
Sheryl Gallant, Ph.D.
Leslie Gise, M.D.
Uriel Halbreich, M.D.
Jean Hamilton, M.D.
Michelle Harrison, M.D.
Roger F. Haskett, M.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Stephen W. Hurt, Ph.D.
Renee Johns, B.A.
W. Keye, Jr., M.D.
Martha Kirkpatrick, M.D.
Martha McClintock, Ph.D.
Margaret L. Moline, Ph.D.
Carol C. Nadelson, M.D.
Howard Osofsky, M.D.
Mary Brown Parlee, Ph.D.
Jeff Rausch, M.D.
Robert Reid, M.D.
R. Rhodes, M.D.
Ana Rivera-Tovar, Ph.D.
Gail Robinson, M.D.
Miriam Rosenthal, M.D.
Peter Roy-Byrne, M.D.
David Rubinow, M.D.
Paula Schnurr, Ph.D.
John Steege, M.D.
Meir Steiner, M.D., Ph.D.
Donna Stewart, M.D.
Anna Stout, M.D.
Lenore B. Walker, Ed.D.
David Youngs, M.D.
Psychiatric Systems Interface
Disorders (Adjustment, Dissociative,
Factitious, Impulse-Control, and
Somatoform Disorders and
Psychological Factors Affecting
Medical Condition) Advisers
Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D.
Allyson Ashley, D.S.W.
Arthur J. Barsky, M.D.
David H. Barlow, Ph.D.
Johnathon O. Beahrs, M.D.
David Bear, M.D.
Gale Beardsley, M.D.
Sidney Benjamin, M.D., M.Phil.
Kenneth Bowers, Ph.D.
John Bradford, M.D.
Bennett Braun, M.D.
Etzel Cardena, Ph.D.
James Chu, M.D.
Catherine Classen, Ph.D.
Philip Coons, M.D.
Douglas Detrick, Ph.D.
Robert H. Dworkin, Ph.D.
David Folks, M.D.
Fred Frankel, M.D.
Edward Frischholz, Ph.D.
George Fulup, M.D.
Rollin Gallagher, M.D.
Jeffrey Geller, M.D.
Daniel W. Gillette, M.D.
Michael G. Goldstein, M.D.
Veerainder Goli, M.B.
Carlos A. Gonzalez, M.D.
Junius Gonzales, M.D.
Michael I. Good, M.D.
Ezra E. H. Griffith, M.D.
Samuel B. Guze, M.D.
Seymour L. Halleck, M.D.
Abraham L. Halpern, M.D., Ph.D.
Nelson Hendler, M.S., M.D.
Ernest Hilgard, Ph.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Jimmie C. Holland, M.D.
Eric Hollander, M.D.
James J. Hudziak, M.D.
Janis H. Jenkins, Ph.D.
Roger Kathol, M.D.
J. David Kinzie, M.D.
Laurence Kirmayer, M.D.
Arthur Kleinman, M.D., Ph.D.
Richard Kluft, M.D.
Cheryl Koopman, Ph.D.
Donald S. Kornfeld, M.D.
K. Ranga Rama Krishnan, M.D.
John Kurtz, M.D.
Henry R. Lesieur, Ph.D.
James Levenson, M.D.
Roberto Lewis-Fernandez, M.D.
John Lion, M.D.
ZbigniewJ. Lipowski, M.D.
Don R. Lipsitt, M.D.
Richard Loewenstein, M.D.
Jeffrey Mattes, M.D.DSM-IV Contributors
M. Eileen McNamara, M.D.
Harold Merskey, D.M.
Michael Moran, M.D.
George B. Murray, M.D.
John Nemiah, M.D.
Jeffrey Newcorn, M.D.
Raymond Niaura, Ph.D.
Perry M. Nicassio, Ph.D.
Martin Orne, M.D., Ph.D.
Kalpana Pakianathan, M.D.
Robert O. Pasnau, M.D.
Kok Lee Peng, M.D.
Samuel W. Perry III, M.D.
Gary Peterson, M.D.
John Plewes, M.D.
Stanley L. Portnow, M.D., Ph.D.
Frank Putnam, M.D.
Phillip Jacob Resnick, M.D.
Richard J. Rosenthal, M.D.
Colin A. Ross, M.D.
John Z. Sadler, M.D.
Shirley Sanders, Ph.D.
Stephen M. Saravay, M.D.
Jonathon F. Silver, M.D.
Herbert Spiegel, M.D.
Marlene Steinberg, M.D.
Robert Stewart, D.S.W.
Marvin Swartz, M.D.
Troy L. Thompson II, M.D.
Moshe Torem, M.D.
Eldon Tunks, M.D.
William L. Webb, Jr., M.D. (deceased)
Kenneth Jay Weiss, M.D.
Mitchel Weiss, M.D., Ph.D.
Lewis Jolly West, M.D.
Ronald Winchel, M.D.
Thomas Nathan Wise, M.D.
Dennis Wolf, M.D.
Derson Young, M.D.
Stuart C. Yudofsky, M.D.
Sean Yutzy, M.D.
Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic
Disorders Advisers
Xavier Amador, Ph.D.
Stephan Arndt, Ph.D.
Peter Berner, M.D.
Istvan Bitter, M.D.
Donald W. Black, M.D.
Randy Borum, M.D.
Malcolm B. Bowers, Jr., M.D.
H. Stefan Bracha, M.D.
Ian Brockington, M.D.
William Carpenter, M.D.
Richard J. Castillo, Ph.D.
David Copolov, M.D.
Lawrence A. Dunn, M.D.
William Edell, Ph.D.
Akira Fujinawa, M.D.
Carlos A. Gonzalez, M.D.
Jack Gorman, M.D.
Igor Grant, M.D.
Ezra E. H. Griffith, M.D.
Gretchen Haas, Ph.D.
Martin Harrow, Ph.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Janis H. Jenkins, Ph.D.
Dilip V. Jeste, M.D.
Marvin Karno, M.D.
Robert Kendell, M.D.
Anthony F. Lehman, M.D., M.S.P.H.
Roberto Lewis-Fernandez, M.D.
Robert Liberman, M.D.
Jeffrey Lieberman, M.D.
Mario Maj, M.D.
Joseph P. McEvoy, M.D.
Max McGee, M.D.
Patrick McGorry, M.B.B.S.
Herbert Meltzer, M.D.
Alan Metz, M.D.
Jeffrey L. Metzner, M.D.
Mark Richard Munetz, M.D.
Alistair Munroe, M.D.
Keith Neuchterlein, Ph.D.
Yuji Okazaki, M.D.
Alfonso Ontiveros, M.D., M.Sc.
Stein Opjordsmoen, Ph.D.
Ananda K. Pandurangi, M.D.
Godfrey Pearlson, M.D.
Delbert Robinson, M.D.
Nina Schooler, Ph.D.
Larry Siever, M.D.
Samuel Siris, M.D.
John Sweeney, Ph.D.
Sally Szymanski, D.O.
Mauricio Tohen, M.D.
Ming Tso Tsuang, M.D., Ph.D.
Michael Zaudig, M.D.
859860
Appendix J
Sexual Disorders Advisers
John Bradford, M.D.
Robert P. Cabaj, M.D.
Dona L. Davis, Ph.D.
Park Elliott Dietz, M.D., Ph.D.
Leslie Gise, M.D.
Abraham L. Halpern, M.D., Ph.D.
Gilbert Herdt, Ph.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Helen Kaplan, M.D.
Kok Lee Peng, M.D.
Anna Stout, M.D.
Sleep Disorders Advisers
Edward Bixler, M.D.
Jack Edinger, M.D.
Charles W. Erwin, M.D.
Eugene C. Fletcher, M.D.
Abraham L. Halpern, M.D., Ph.D.
Peter Hauri, Ph.D.
Anthony Kales, M.D.
Milton Kramer, M.D.
Rocco Manfredi, M.D.
Gail Marsh, M.D.
Jeffrey L. Metzner, M.D.
Harvey Moldofsky, M.D.
Timothy H. Monk, Ph.D.
Ralph Pascualy, M.D., R.N.
Howard Roffwarg, M.D.
Thomas Roth, Ph.D.
A. John Rush, M.D.
Constantin R. Soldatos, M.D.
Edward Stepanski, Ph.D.
Michael Thorpy, M.D.
Substance-Related
Disorders Advisers
Henry Abraham, M.D.
Christer Allgulander, M.D.
Arthur Alterman, Ph.D.
Roland Atkinson, M.D.
Tom Babor, Ph.D.
George Bailey, M.D.
James Barbie, M.D.
Jeffrey Bedrick, M.D.
Fred K. Berger, M.D.
Jack D. Blaine, M.D.
Sheila Blume, M.D.
Richard Bonnie, J.D.
Kathleen Bucholz, Ph.D.
John Cacciola, Ph.D.
Glorissa Canino, Ph.D.
William D. Clark, M.D.
Stephen Dinwiddie, M.D.
Griffith Edwards, M.D.
Marian Fischman, Ph.D.
Richard Frances, M.D.
William Frosch, M.D.
Marc Galanter, M.D.
Frank Gawin, M.D.
Edith S. Linansky Gomberg, Ph.D.
Enoch Gordis, M.D.
David Gorelick, M.D.
Bridget Grant, Ph.D.
Marcus Grant, Ph.D.
Lester Grinspoon, M.D.
Alfred Harkley, M.D.
James Hartford, M.D.
Deborah Hasin, Ph.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Arthur M. Horton, Ph.D.
John R. Hughes, M.D.
Michael Irwin, M.D.
Jerome Jaffe, M.D.
Denise Kandel, Ph.D.
Edward Kaufman, M.D.
Herbert Kleber, M.D.
Thomas Kosten, M.D.
Mary Jeanne Kreek, M.D.
James Langenbucher, Ph.D.
Edward D. Levin, Ph.D.
Benjamin Liptzin, M.D.
James Maddox, M.D.
Enrique Madrigal, M.D.
Peter Martin, M.D.
Roy Mathew, M.D.
Wayne McFadden, M.D.
Thomas McLellan, Ph.D.
Jack H. Mendelsohn, M.D.
Roger Meyer, M.D.
Norman Miller, M.D.
Robert Millman, M.D.
Maristela Monteiro, M.D.
Robert M. Morse, M.D.
David F. Naftolowitz, M.D.
Paul Nagy
Charles O'Brien, M.D.
Glen Pearson, M.D.DSM-IV Contributors
Stanton Peele, Ph.D.
Helen Pettinatti, Ph.D.
Roy Pickens, Ph.D.
Andrzej Piotrowski, M.D.
Rumi Price, Ph.D.
Anthony Radcliffe, M.D.
Charles Riordan, M.D.
Jed Rose, Ph.D.
Bruce Rounsaville, M.D.
John Saunders, M.D.
Sidney H. Schnoll, M.D.
Charles R. Schuster, Ph.D.
Boris Segal, M.D.
Roy Stein, M.D.
Lee L. Towle, Ph.D.
John Tsuang, M.D.
Harold Urschell III, M.D.
Dermot Walsh, M.B.
Robert Weinrieb, M.D.
Joseph Westermeyer, M.D., Ph.D.
M.P.H.
Kenneth Winters, Ph.D.
Sheldon Zimberg, M.D.
Task Force Advisers
Advisers on Coding Issues
Andrea Albaum-Feinstein
Margaret Amatayakul, M.B.A., R.R.A.
Amy Blum, M.P.H., R.R.A.
Delray Green, R.R.A.
Deborah K. Hansen, A.R.T., C.C.S.
Robert A. Israel, M.P.H.
L. Ann Kirner, C.C.S.
Perrianne Lurie, M.D., M.P.H.
Sue Meads, R.R.A.
James W. Thompson, M.D., M.P.H.
Advisers on Cross-Cultural Issues
Juan Enrique Mezzich, M.D., Ph.D.
Arthur Kleinman, M.D., Ph.D.
Horacio Fabrega, Jr., M.D.
Delores Parron, Ph.D.
Byron Good, Ph.D.
Keh-Ming Lin, M.D.
Spero Manson, Ph.D.
Gloria Johnson-Powell, M.D.
Victor R. Adebimpe, M.D.
Renato Daniel Alarcon, M.D., M.P.H.
William Arroyo, M.D.
Morton Beiser, M.D.
James Boster, Ph.D.
Glorissa Canino, Ph.D.
Ian Alberto Canino, M.D.
Richard J. Castillo, Ph.D.
Freda Cheung, Ph.D.
Ellen Corin, Ph.D.
Dona L. Davis, Ph.D.
Armando Favazza, M.D.
Candace Fleming, Ph.D.
Edward F. Foulks, M.D., Ph.D.
Atwood Gaines, Ph.D.
Albert Gaw, M.D.
James Gibbs, Ph.D.
Carlos A. Gonzalez, M.D.
Ezra E. H. Griffith, M.D.
Peter J. Guarnaccia, Ph.D.
Gilbert Herdt, Ph.D.
Kim Hopper, Ph.D.
David Hufford, Ph.D.
Charles Hughes, Ph.D.
Janis H. Jenkins, Ph.D.
Marvin Karno, M.D.
Marianne Kastrup, M.D., Ph.D.
J. David Kinzie, M.D.
Laurence Kirmayer, M.D.
Paul Koegel, Ph.D.
Robert F. Kraus, M.D.
Tina K. Leonard-Green, M.S., R.D.
Roberto Lewis-Fernandez, M.D.
T-Y Lin, M.D.
Roland Littlewood, M.B., D.Phil.
Francis Lu, M.D.
Enrique Madrigal, M.D.
Theresa O'Nell, Ph.D.
Raymond Prince, M.D.
Juan Ramos, Ph.D.
Cheryl Ritenbaugh, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Lloyd Rogler, Ph.D.
William H. Sack, M.D.
Ihsan Salloum, M.D., M.P.H.
861862
Appendix J
Norman Sartorius, M.D., Ph.D.
Catherine L. Shisslak, Ph.D.
Ronald C. Simons, M.D., M.A.
Jeanne M. Spurlock, M.D.
Nicolette Teufel, Ph.D.
James W. Thompson, M.D., M.P.H.
Wen-Shing Tseng, M.D.
Mitchel Weiss, M.D., Ph.D.
Joseph Westermeyer, M.D., Ph.D.,
M.P.H.
Charles Wilkinson, M.D.
Ronald M. Wintrob, M.D.
Joseph Yamamoto, M.D.
Advisers on Family/
Relational Issues
James Alexander, Ph.D.
Arthur M. Bodin, Ph.D.
Robert Butler, M.D.
Patricia Chamberlain, Ph.D.
Dante Cichetti, Ph.D.
John Clarkin, Ph.D.
Daniel Corwin, M.D.
Mark R. Ginsberg, Ph.D.
Michael J. Goldstein, Ph.D.
Herta A. Guttman, M.D.
Michael D. Kahn, Ph.D.
Sandra Kaplan, M.D.
Florence Kaslow, Ph.D.
John F. Knutson, Ph.D.
Judy Magil, M.S.W.
David Milkowitz, Ph.D.
K. Daniel O'Leary, Ph.D.
David Olson, Ph.D.
David Pelcovitz, Ph.D.
Angus M. Strachan, Ph.D.
Terry S. Trepper, Ph.D.
Lyman C. Wynne, M.D., Ph.D.
Ramsy Yassa, M.D.
Advisers on Forensic Issues
Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D.
James C. Beck, M.D.
Lewis M. Bloomingdale, M.D.
Richard Bonnie, J.D.
Jeffrey Lee Cummings, M.D.
Jeffrey Geller, M.D.
Robert P. Granacher, M.D., Ph.D.
Thomas Gordon Gutheil, M.D.
Abraham L. Halpern, M.D., Ph.D.
Steven Ken Hoge, M.D.
Stuart Kleinman, M.D.
Jeffrey L. Metzner, M.D.
Charles A. Meyer, Jr., M.D.
Robert David Miller, M.D., Ph.D.
Mark Richard Munetz, M.D.
Stanley L. Portnow, M.D., Ph.D.
Phillip Jacob Resnick, M.D.
Richard Rosner, M.D.
Daniel W. Shuman
Larry H. Strasburger, M.D., Ph.D.
Kenneth Jay Weiss, M.D.
Howard Zonana, M.D.
Advisers on Medication-Induced
Movement Disorders
Gerard Addonizio, M.D.
Lenard Adler, M.D.
Burt Angrist, M.D.
RossJ. Baldessarini, M.D.
Stanley N. Caroff, M.D.
Daniel Casey, M.D.
Jeffrey Lee Cummings, M.D.
George Gardos, M.D.
Allen Gelenberg, M.D.
James Jefferson, M.D.
Dilip V. Jeste, M.D.
John M. Kane, M.D.
Paul E. Keck, M.D.
James Levenson, M.D.
Stephan C. Mann, M.D.
Ananda K. Pandurangi, M.D.
Patricia Rosebush, M.D.
Virginia Susman, M.D.
Peter Weiden, M.D.
Ramsy Yassa, M.D.
Advisers to the Task Force
on DSM-IV
Boris M. Astrachan, M.D.
Robert Avant, M.D.
Jeanette Bair, B.S., M.B.A.
W. Robert Beavers, M.D.
Jeffrey Bedrick, M.D.
Carl Bell, M.D.
Ellen Berman, M.D.
Eugene Broadhead, M.D., Ph.D.
Laura Brown, Ph.D.DSM-IV Contributors
Robert P. Cabaj, M.D.
Robert Cahan, M.D.
Robert Chiarello, M.D.
William D. Clark, M.D.
Steven Cohen-Cole, M.D.
Lee Combrinck-Graham, M.D.
Vicky Conn, R.N.
Harris Cooper, Ph.D.
Michael Crouch, M.D.
Alan Daniels
Frank deGruy, M.D.
Susan Dime-Meenan
Stacy Donovan, B.A.
Richard Dudley, M.D.
Suzanne Dworak-Peck
Bruce Emery, A.C.S.W.
Spencer Falcon, M.D.
Louis Fine, M.D.
Susan Fine, M.A.
Rita Finnegan, R.R.A.
Gerald H. Flamm, M.D.
Laurie Flynn, B.A.
Raymond D. Fowler, Ph.D.
Richard Frances, M.D.
Jack Froom, M.D.
Robert W. Gibson, M.D.
Junius Gonzales, M.D.
Raphael S. Good, M.D.
Robert C. Green, M.D.
Larry P. Griffin, M.D.
Claire Griffin-Francell, R.N.
Alfred Harkley, M.D.
Norman B. Hartstein, M.D.
Ann Hohmann, Ph.D.
Theodore Hutchison, M.D.
Dale Johnson, Ph.D.
John E. Joyner, M.D.
Harold Kaminetzky, M.D.
Ira Katz, M.D.
Jerald Kay, M.D.
Kelly Kelleher, M.D.
Helena Kraemer, Ph.D.
John J. LaFerla, M.D.
Marion Langer, Ph.D.
Martha Lasseter, R.R.A.
Philip Lavori, Ph.D.
Lawrence N. Lazarus, M.D.
Harriet Lefley, Ph.D.
James Levenson, M.D.
Frank Ling, M.D.
Mack Lipkin, M.D.
Don-David Lusterman, Ph.D.
Richard M. Magraw, M.D.
Kathryn Magruder, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Dale Matthews, M.D.
Chuck Miles, M.D.
Sheldon I. Miller, M.D.
Paul D. Mozley, M.D.
Kathi Pajer, M.D.
Joseph Palombi, M.D.
Robert C. Park, M.D.
Elaine Purpel, M.S.W.
Peter Rabins, M.D.
Anthony Radcliffe, M.D.
Richard Rahe, M.D.
Peter Rappo, M.D.
Marilyn Rosenson, M.S.W.
Marshall Rosman, Ph.D.
Donald J. Scherl, M.D.
Sidney H. Schnoll, M.D.
Diana Seebold, R.R.A.
Charles A. Shamoian, M.D., Ph.D.
Steven Sharfstein, M.D.
J. Gregory Shea
Alfred Skinner, M.D.
William W. Snavely
Janet T. Spence
Leon Speroff, M.D.
Emanuel Steindler
Melvin Stern, M.D.
James E. Strain, M.D.
Rev. Paul C. Tomlinson
Michael B. Unhjem
Jerome Vaccaro, M.D.
Jeanne Van Riper, A.R.T.
Alan J. Wabrek, M.D.
Lenore B. Walker, Ed.D.
Steven Wartman, M.D.
Robert Weinrieb, M.D.
Robert Weinstock, Ph.D.
Bryant Welch, Ph.D.
Eleanor White, Ph.D.
Robert L. Williams, M.D.
Mark Wolraich, M.D.
David Youngs, M.D.
863864
Appendix J
International Advisers
The Task Force on DSM-IV sought the expertise of a wide range of international experts.
The contributions of international experts helped to ensure cultural sensitivity, applica-
bility for international mental health professionals, and greater compatibility with ICD-10.
International experts advised both the Task Force and individual Work Groups.
Christer Allgulander, M.D. (Sweden)
Paulo Alterwain, M.D. (Uruguay)
Antonio Andreoli, M.D. (Switzerland)
Jules Angst, M.D. (Switzerland)
Beng-Ake Armelius, Ph.D. (Switzerland)
Marie Asberg, M.D. (Sweden)
Tolani Asuni, M.D. (Nigeria)
Sidney Benjamin, M.D., M.Phil.
(England)
Mark Berelowitz, M.D. (England)
Peter Berner, M.D. (Austria)
Aksel Bertelsen, M.D. (Denmark)
Peter Beumont, M.D. (Australia)
Istvan Bitter, M.D. (Hungary)
Ray Blanchard, Ph.D. (Canada)
Daniel Bobon (Belgium)
Jacek Bomba, M.D. (Poland)
Kenneth Bowers, Ph.D. (Canada)
John Bradford, M.D. (Canada)
Susan Bradley, M.D. (Canada)
Jack Brandes, M.D. (Canada)
Ian Brockington, M.D. (England)
Graham Burrows, M.D. (Australia)
Patricia Casey, M.D. (Ireland)
Giovanni Cassano, M.D. (Italy)
Doo Young Cho, M.D. (Korea)
David M. Clark, Ph.D. (England)
John E. Cooper, M.D. (England)
Peter J. Cooper, M.D. (England)
David Copolov, M.D. (Australia)
Jorge Costa e Silva, M.D. (Brazil)
Arthur H. Crisp, M.D. (England)
Stanislaw Dabrowski, M.D. (Poland)
Adrian Dafunchio, M.D. (Argentina)
Alv A. Dahl, M.D. (Norway)
Christine Dean, M.D. (England)
Horst Dilling, M.D. (Germany)
Keith Stephen Dobson, Ph.D. (Canada)
Griffith Edwards, M.D. (England)
Christopher Fairburn, M.D. (England)
Francois Ferrero, M.D. (Switzerland)
Manfred Fichter, M.D. (Germany)
Martine Flament, M.D. (France)
Chris Freeman, M.D. (Scotland)
Harold Freyberger, M.D. (Germany)
Akira Fujinawa, M.D. (Japan)
Paul Garfinkel, M.D. (Canada)
Michael Gelder, M.D. (England)
Semyon Gluzman, M.D. (former USSR)
Judith H. Gold, M.D. (Canada)
Marcus Grant, Ph.D. (Switzerland)
Herta A. Guttman, M.D. (Canada)
Heinz Hafner, M.D. (Germany)
Robert Hare, Ph.D. (Canada)
Lily Hechtman, M.D. (Canada)
Michiel W. Hengeveld, M.D., Ph.D.
(Netherlands)
C. Peter Herman, Ph.D. (Canada)
Hans Hippius, M.D. (Germany)
Willem M. Hirs, M.D. (Netherlands)
Teo Seng Hock, M.D. (Singapore)
Hans W. Hoek, M.D., Ph.D.
(Netherlands)
Yoshiko Ikeda, M.D. (Japan)
Assen Jablensky, M.D. (Bulgaria)
Aleksander Janca, M.D. (Switzerland)
Philippe Jeammet, M.D. (France)
Karen John, M.D. (England)
Miguel Jorge, M.D., Ph.D. (Brazil)
Ross S. Kalucy, M.D. (Australia)
Marianne Kastrup, M.D., Ph.D.
(Denmark)
Heinz Katschnig, M.D. (Austria)
Justin Kenardy, Ph.D. (Australia)
Robert Kendell, M.D. (Scotland)
Sid Kennedy, M.D. (Canada)
Renard Knabbe, M.D. (Switzerland)
Vladimir Kovalev, M.D. (former USSR)
Evsey Krasik, M.D. (former USSR)
Yves LeCrubier, M.D. (France)
Pierre Leichner, M.D. (Canada)
Jill Leolbonne, M.D. (England)DSM-IV Contributors
Bernard Lerer, M.D. (Israel)
Aubrey Levin, M.D. (South Africa)
Paul Links, M.D. (Canada)
Zbigniew Lipowski, M.D. (Canada)
Alwyn Lishman, M.D. (England)
W. John Livesley, M.D. (Canada)
J. Lopez-Ibor, Jr., M.D. (Spain)
Mario Maj, M.D. (Italy)
Felice Lieh Mak (China)
Nikolas Manos, M.D. (Greece)
Isaac Marks, M.D. (England)
Alexander C. McFarlane, M.B.B.S.
(Hons), M.D. (Australia)
Patrick McGorry, M.B.B.S. (Australia)
Julien Mendelewicz, M.D. (Belgium)
Klaus Minde, M.D. (Canada)
Harvey Moldofsky, M.D. (Canada)
Maristela Monteiro, M.D. (Brazil)
Stuart Montgomery, M.D. (England)
Ole Mors, M.D. (Denmark)
Alistair Munroe, M.D. (Canada)
Gulam Mustafa, M.D. (Kenya)
Yoshibumi Nakane, M.D. (Japan)
W.A. Nolen (Netherlands)
Claes Norring, Dr.Med.Sc. (Sweden)
Yuri Nuller (former USSR)
Ahmed Okasha, M.D. (Egypt)
Yuji Okazaki, M.D. (Japan)
Yutaka Ono, M.D. 0 a P an )
Alfonso Ontiveros, M.D., M.Sc. (Mexico)
Stein Opjordsmoen, Ph.D. (Norway)
John Orley, M.D. (Switzerland)
Lars Goran Ost, Ph.D. (Sweden)
Stefano Pallanti, M.D. (Italy)
Joel Paris, M.D. (Canada)
Gordon Parker, M.D. (Australia)
Eugene Paykel, M.D. (England)
Kok Lee Peng, M.D. (Singapore)
Uwe Henrick Peters, M.D. (Germany)
Carlo Perris, M.D. (Sweden)
Pierre Pichot, M.D. (France)
Andrzej Piotrowski, M.D. (Poland)
Karl Pirke, M.D. (Germany)
Janet Polivy, Ph.D. (Canada)
Charles Pull, M.D. (Luxembourg)
Kari Pylkkanen, M.D. (Finland)
Juan Ramon de la Fuente, M.D. (Mexico)
Beverley Raphael, M.D. (Australia)
Robert Reid, M.D. (Canada)
865
Helmut Remschmidt (Germany)
Nils Rettersol, M.D. (Norway)
Joseph M. Rey, Ph.D. (Australia)
Jeffrey C. Richards, Ph.D. (Australia)
Antonio A. Rizzoli, M.D. (Italy)
Paul Robinson, M.D. (England)
Sir Martin Roth, M.D. (England)
Byron Rourke, Ph.D. (Canada)
Gerald Russell, M.D. (England)
Sir Michael Rutter, M.D. (England)
Javier Saavedra, M.D. (Peru)
Paul Salkovskis, Ph.D. (England)
Norman Sartorius, M.D., Ph.D.
(Switzerland)
John Saunders, M.D. (Australia)
Aart H. Schene, M.D. (Netherlands)
Marcus Fini Schulsinger, M.D.
(Denmark)
Jan Scott, Ph.D. (England)
Ruben Hernandez Serrano, M.D.
(Venezuela)
Michael Shephard, M.D. (England)
Erik Simonsen, M.D. (Denmark)
CeesJ. Slooff, M.D. (Netherlands)
Constantin R. Soldatos, M.D. (Greece)
Zahava Soloman, M.D. (Israel)
Marin Stancu, M.D. (Romania)
Meir Steiner, M.D., Ph.D. (Canada)
Donna Stewart, M.D. (Canada)
Eric Stromgren, M.D. (Denmark)
Peter Szatmari, M.D. (Canada)
George Szmukler, M.D. (England)
Alex Tarnopolsky, M.D. (Canada)
Christopher Tennant, M.D. (Australia)
Sten Theander, M.D. (Sweden)
Pekka Tienari, M.D. (Finland)
Svenn Torgensen, M.D. (Norway)
Peter Trower, Ph.D. (England)
Eldon Tunks, M.D. (Canada)
Peter Tyrer, M.D. (England)
T. Bedirhan Ustun, M.D. (Switzerland)
Per Vaglum, M.D. (Norway)
Walter Vandereycken, M.D. (Belgium)
Jenny Van Drimmelen-Krabbe, M.D.
(Switzerland)
J. T. van Mens, M.D. (Netherlands)
David Veale, M.R.C.Psych. (England)
F. C. Verhulst (Netherlands)
Marcio Versiani, M.D. (Brazil)866
Appendix J
Marten W. de Vries, M.D. (Netherlands)
Dermot Walsh, M.B. (Ireland)
Winny Weeda-Mannak, Ph.D.
(Netherlands)
John S. Werry, M.D. (New Zealand)
Hans Ulrich Wittchen, Ph.D. (Germany)
Ramsy Yassa, M.D. (Canada)
Derson Young, M.D. (China)
Michael Zaudig, M.D. (Germany)
Joseph Zohar, M.D. (Israel)
Kenneth J. Zucker, Ph.D. (Canada)
Roberto Llanos Zuloaga, M.D. (Peru)
DSM-IV Focused Field-Trial Projects
1 he field-trial projects funded by the National Institute of Mental Health in collaboration
with the National Institute on Drug Abuse and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism were an invaluable source of data and contributed greatly to the quality
of DSM-IV. Our thanks to Darrel Regier, M.D., M.P.H., Director of the Division of
Epidemiology and Services Research, and Charles Kaelber, M.D., the Project Officer, for
their support and expertise. Our thanks, too, to the following field-trial participants:
Principal Investigator
Allen Frances, M.D.
Co-Principal Investigator
Harold Alan Pincus, M.D.
Field-Trial Coordinator
Myriam Kline, M.S.
Statistical Consultant
Helena Kraemer, Ph.D.
Antisocial Personality
Disorder Field Trial
Project Director
Thomas A. Widiger, Ph.D.
Site Coordinators
Arthur Alterman, Ph.D.
RemiJ. Cadoret, M.D.
Robert Hare, Ph.D.
Lee Robins, Ph.D.
George E. Woody, M.D.
Mary C. Zanarini, Ed.D. Catherine Lord, Ph.D.
E. Ritvo, M.D.
Sir Michael Rutter, M.D.
Eric Schopler, Ph.D.
Site Coordinators, Volunteer Sites
Joel Bregman, M.D.
Jan Buitelaar, M.D.
Soo Churl Cho, M.D.
Eric Fombonne, M.D.
Joaquin Fuentes, M.D.
Yossie Hattab, M.D.
Yoshihiko Hoshino, M.D.
J. Kerbeshian, M.D.
William Kline, Ph.D.
Katherine Loveland, Ph.D.
Bryna Siegel, Ph.D.
Wendy Stone, M.D.
Peter Szatmari, M.D.
Ludwig Szymanski, M.D.
Kenneth Towbin, M.D.
John S. Werry, M.D.
Autism and Pervasive Developmental
Disorders Field Trial
Project Director
Fred Volkmar, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
Magda Campbell, M.D.
B. J. Freeman, Ph.D.
Ami Klin, Ph.D. Disruptive Behavior
Disorder Field Trial
Project Director
Benjamin Lahey, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
Russell Barkley, Ph.D.
Joseph Biederman, M.D.
Barry Garfinkel, M.D.DSM-IV Contributors
Laurence Greenhill, M.D.
George Hynd, Ed.D.
Keith McBurnett, Ph.D.
Jeffrey Newcorn, M.D.
Thomas Ollendick, Ph.D.
Site Coordinators, Volunteer Sites
Paul Frick, Ph.D.
Peter Jensen, M.D.
Lynn Kerdyk, Ph.D.
John Richters, Ph.D.
Data Coordinator
Dorcas Perez, B.A.
Major Depression, Dysthymia,
and Minor Depressive Disorder
Field Trial
Project Director
Martin B. Keller, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Project Co-Directors
Michael B. First, M.D.
James Kocsis, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
Robert M. A. Hirschfeld, M.D.
Charles Holzer, Ph.D.
Gabor Keitner, M.D.
Daniel Klein, Ph.D.
Deborah Marin, M.D.
James P. McCullough, Ph.D.
Ivan Miller, Ph.D.
Tracie Shea, Ph.D.
Data Coordinators
Diane Hanks, M.A.
Cordelia Russell, B.A.
Mixed Anxiety-Depressive
Disorder Field Trial
Project Directors
David H. Barlow, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Michael R. Liebowitz, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Richard Zinbarg, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
Phil Brantley, Ph.D.
867
Eugene Broadhead, M.D., Ph.D.
Wayne Katon, M.D.
Jean-Pierre Lepine, M.D.
Jeffrey C. Richards, Ph.D.
Peter Roy-Byrne, M.D.
Linda Street, Ph.D.
Mardjan Teherani, Ph.D.
Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder Field Trial
Project Director
Edna Foa, Ph.D. (also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
Jane Eisen, M.D.
Wayne Goodman, M.D.
Hella Hiss, Ph.D.
Eric Hollander, M.D.
Michael Jenike, M.D.
Michael J. Kozak, Ph.D.
Steven Rasmussen, M.D.
Joseph Ricciardi, Ph.D.
Peggy Richter, M.D.
Barbara Rothbaum, Ph.D.
Panic Disorder Field Trial
Project Director
Abby Fyer, M.D. (also Site Coordinator)
Project Co-Director
James C. Ballenger, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
David H. Barlow, Ph.D.
Michael Hollifield, M.D.
Wayne Katon, M.D.
Richard Swinson, M.D.
Data Analysts
Tim Chapman, M.Phil.
Salvatore Mannuzza, Ph.D.
Data Coordinator
Hilary Rassnick, M.A.
Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder Field Trial
Project Director
Dean Kilpatrick, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)868
Appendix J
Bessel van der Kolk, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Charles F. Reynolds III, M.D.
Site Coordinators
John Freedy, Ph.D.
Sandra Kaplan, M.D.
David Pelcovitz, Ph.D.
Patty Resick, Ph.D.
Heidi Resnick, Ph.D.
Susan Roth, Ph.D. Site Coordinators
Edward Bixler, M.D.
Peter Hauri, Ph.D.
Anthony Kales, M.D.
Rocco Manfredi, M.D.
Thomas Roth, Ph.D.
Edward Stepanski, Ph.D.
Michael Thorpy, M.D.
Schizophrenia and Related Psychotic
Disorders Field Trial Data Coordinator
Debbie Mesiano, B.S.
Project Directors
Nancy Coover Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Michael A. Flaum, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
Xavier Amador, Ph.D.
H. Stefan Bracha, M.D.
William Edell, Ph.D.
Jack Gorman, M.D.
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
Jeffrey Lieberman, M.D.
Thomas McGlashan, M.D.
Ananda K. Pandurangi, M.D.
Delbert Robinson, M.D.
Site Coordinators, Volunteer Sites
Patrick McGorry, M.B.B.S.
Alfonso Ontiveros, M.D., M.Sc.
Mauricio Tohen, M.D.
Sleep Disorders Field Trial
Project Directors
Daniel Buysse, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
David J. Kupfer, M.D.
Somatization Disorder Field Trial
Project Director
C. Robert Cloninger, M.D.
Site Coordinators
Samuel B. Guze, M.D.
Roger Kathol, M.D.
Ronald L. Martin, M.D.
Richard Smith, M.D.
James J. Strain, M.D.
Sean Yutzy, M.D.
Substance Use Field Trial
Project Directors
Linda Cottier, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
John E. Helzer, M.D.
Marc Alan Schuckit, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Site Coordinators
Thomas Crowley, M.D.
John R. Hughes, M.D.
George E. Woody, M.D.
Site Coordinators, Volunteer Sites
Jean-Pierre Lepine, M.D.DSM-IV Contributors
869
MacArthur Data-Reanalysis Project
1 he data-reanalysis projects funded by a generous grant from the John D. and Catherine
T. MacArthur Foundation provided an extensive research database. Many thanks to
Dennis Prager at the Foundation for his tremendous support. Our sincere appreciation
to the following individuals who conducted data-reanalysis projects:
Principal Investigator
Allen Frances, M.D.
Co-Principal Investigators
Harold Alan Pincus, M.D.
Thomas A. Widiger, Ph.D.
Anxiety Disorders
David H. Barlow, Ph.D.
Deborah C. Beidel, Ph.D.
Thomas Burton, B.A.
Michelle G. Craske, Ph.D.
George C. Curtis, M.D.
Peter A. DiNardo, Ph.D.
Abby Fyer, M.D.
Robin Garfinkel, Ph.D.
Richard Heimberg, Ph.D.
Elizabeth M. Hill, Ph.D.
Christopher D. Hornig, B.A.
Ewald Horwath, M.D., M.Sc.
James Johnson, Ph.D. (deceased)
Harlan Juster, Ph.D.
Wayne Katon, M.D.
Gerald L. Klerman, M.D. (deceased)
Karen Law, B.A.
Andrew Leon, Ph.D.
Michael R. Liebowitz, M.D.
Salvatore Mannuzza, Ph.D.
Jill Mattia, M.A.
Eryn Oberlander, M.D.
Susan Orsillo, M.A.
Peter Roy-Byrne, M.D.
Paul Salkovskis, Ph.D.
Franklin Schneier, M.D.
Samuel M. Turner, Ph.D.
Myrna M. Weissman, Ph.D.
Susan I. Wolk, M.D.
Roberto Zarate, M.A.
Delirium, Dementia, and Amnestic
and Other Cognitive Disorders
Michael O. Colvin, M.D.
Marshall Folstein, M.D.
Gary Lloyd Gottlieb, M.D.
Dilip V. Jeste, M.D.
Sue Levkoff, D.Sc.
Benjamin Liptzin, M.D.
George W. Rebok, Ph.D.
David Salmon, Ph.D.
Leon Thai, M.D.
Disorders Usually First Diagnosed
During Infancy, Childhood, or
Adolescence
Brooks Applegate, Ph.D.
Gerald August, Ph.D.
Susan J. Bradley, M.D.
Joel Bregman, M.D.
Patricia Cohen, Ph.D.
Michael Flory, Ph.D.
Susan Folstein, M.D.
Eric Fombonne, M.D.
Barry Garfinkel, M.D.
Richard Green, M.D., J.D.
Stephanie M. Green, M.S.
Jane E. Hood, M.A.
Kate Keenan, M.S.
Benjamin Lahey, Ph.D.
Marion Leboyer, M.D.
Rolf Loeber, Ph.D.
Catherine Lord, Ph.D.
John McLennan, M.D.
Nancy Minshew, M.D.
Rhea Paul, Ph.D.
Andrew Pickles, Ph.D.
Howard M. Rebach, Ph.D.
Mary F. Russo, Ph.D.
Sir Michael Rutter, M.D.
Eric Schopler, Ph.D.
Christopher Thomas, M.D.
Fred Volkmar, M.D.
Katherine Williams, Ph.D.
Kenneth J. Zucker, Ph.D.870
Appendix J
Eating Disorders
Arnold Anderson, M.D.
Christopher Fairburn, M.D.
Martine Flament, M.D.
Paul Garfinkel, M.D.
Dean Kilpatrick, Ph.D.
James Mitchell, M.D.
G. Terence Wilson, Ph.D.
Steven Wonderlich, M.D.
Mood Disorders
Gregory Asnis, M.D.
Mark S. Bauer, M.D.
Diane Bynum
Joseph Calabrese, M.D.
William Coryell, M.D.
David Dunner, M.D.
Ellen Frank, Ph.D.
Laszlo Gyulai, M.D.
Martin B. Keller, M.D.
James Kocsis, M.D.
Philip Lavori, Ph.D.
Yves LeCrubier, M.D.
Robert M. Post, M.D.
Samuel J. Simmens, Ph.D.
Stuart Sotsky, M.D.
Dan L. Tweed, Ph.D.
Lindsey Tweed, M.D.
Peter C. Whybrow, M.D.
Sharon Younkin
Personality Disorders
Emil F. Coccaro, M.D.
Mark Davies, M.D.
Michael B. First, M.D.
Robert Hare, Ph.D.
Theodore Millon, Ph.D.
Vivian Mitropoulou, M.A.
Leslie Morey, Ph.D.
Bruce Pfohl, M.D.
Lee Robins, Ph.D.
Larry J. Siever, M.D.
Jeremy M. Silverman, Ph.D.
Andrew Edward Skodol II, M.D.
Timothy Trull, Ph.D.
Thomas A. Widiger, Ph.D.
Mary C. Zanarini, Ed.D.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Ellen Frank, Ph.D.
Ellen W. Freeman, Ph.D.
Leslie Gise, M.D.
Judith H. Gold, M.D.
Barbara Parry, M.D.
Paula Schnurr, Ph.D.
Sally Severino, M.D.
John Steege, M.D.
Meir Steiner, M.D., Ph.D.
Psychiatric Systems Interface
Disorders (Adjustment, Dissociative,
Factitious, Impulse-Control, and
Somatoform Disorders and
Psychological Factors Affecting
Medical Condition)
Henry R. Lesieur, M.D.
Juan Enrique Mezzich, M.D., Ph.D.
Jeffrey Newcorn, M.D.
David A. Spiegel, M.D.
James J. Strain, M.D.
Schizophrenia and
Other Psychotic Disorders
Nancy Coover Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.
Gretchen Haas, Ph.D.
Jeffrey Lieberman, M.D.
Patrick McGorry, M.B.B.S.
Keith Neuchterlein, Ph.D.
Mauricio Tohen, M.D.
Sleep Disorders
Daniel Buysse, M.D.
Charles F. Reynolds III, M.D.
Substance-Related Disorders
John Cacciola, Ph.D.
Linda B. Cottier, Ph.D.
John E. Helzer, M.D.
Rumi Price, Ph.D.
Lee Robins, Ph.D.
Marc Alan Schuckit, M.D.
George E. Woody, M.D.DSM-IV Contributors
871
MacArthur General Reliability Field Trial
As DSM-IV is being published, an additional project sponsored by the John D. and
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation will provide further information regarding the
validity of DSM-IV criteria. The ongoing videotape field-trial project is expected to be
completed in 1995. Our thanks to the following individuals who participated in the
project:
Principal Investigator
Allen Frances, M.D.
James W. Thompson, M.D., M.P.H.
Co-Principal Investigators
Harold Alan Pincus, M.D.
Michael B. First, M.D.
Michael A. Flaum, M.D.
Anthony F. Lehman, M.D., M.S.P.H.
Pilot Participants
Xavier Amador, Ph.D.
Nancy Coover Andreasen, M.D., Ph.D.
F. M. Baker, M.D.
Donald W. Black, M.D.
Carlos S. Castillo, M.D.
Scott C. Clark, M.D.
William Coryell, M.D.
Lisa B. Dixon, M.D.
Jack E. Downhill, Jr., M.D.
Katherine P. Duffy, M.D.
Jean Endicott, Ph.D.
Michael A. Fauman, M.D., Ph.D.
Miriam Gibbon, M.S.W.
Jack Gorman, M.D.
Paul E. Hogsten, M.D.
Michael L. Jeffries, M.D.
Douglas Langbehn, M.D.
Joseph Liberto, M.D.
David B. Mallot, M.D.
Del D. Miller, Pharm.D., M.D.
Lewis A. Opler, M.D., Ph.D.
Jill A. RachBeisel, M.D.
Robert P. Schwartz, M.D.
Andrew Edward Skodol II, M.D.
David H. Strauss, M.D.
Scott Stuart, M.D.
Janet B. W. Williams, D.S.W.
Catherine Woodman, M.D.
Project Coordinator
Jennifer Norbeck, M.S.W.
Video Consultant
Vincent Clayton, M.A.
Expert-Phase Participants
The following represents the project participants at the time that DSM-IV went to press.
It is anticipated that other sites and individuals will join the project.
Jonathan Alpert, M.D.
Katherine Attala, M.D.
David Avery, M.D.
Monica Ramirez Basco, Ph.D.
Mark S. Bauer, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Thomas F. Betzler, M.D.
Melanie M. Biggs, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Robert J. Bishop, M.D.
Danielle Bordeau, M.D.
Malcolm B. Bowers, Jr., M.D.
Gary Bruss, Ph.D.
Peter Buckley, M.D.
Deborah S. Cowley, M.D.
Brian Cox, Ph.D.
James David, M.D.
Collette De Marneffe, Ph.D.
Judith Dogin, M.D.
Seda Ebrahimi, Ph.D.
Jane Eisen, M.D.
Maurizio Fava, M.D.872
Appendix J
Paul Federoff, M.D.
Mark K. Fulton, M.D.
Diego Garcia-Borreguero, M.D.
Roya Ghadimi, M.D.
David S. Goldbloom, M.D.
Reed D. Goldstein, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Micael Golinkoff, Ph.D.
Peter Goyer, M.D.
Alan M. Gruenberg, M.D.
Michael E. Henry, M.D.
Selby C. Jacobs, M.D.
J. Joel Jeffries, M.B.
(also Site Coordinator)
Sheri Johnson, Ph.D.
Kathleen Kim, M.D., M.P.H.
Carolyn M. Mazure, Ph.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Joseph P. McEvoy, M.D.
Arnold Merrimam, M.D.
Timothy I. Mueller, M.D.
Andrew Nierenberg, M.D.
Michael Otto, Ph.D.
Michelle Pato, M.D.
Joel Pava, Ph.D.
Katharine Anne Phillips, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Mark Pollack, M.D.
Horatio Preval, M.D.
David W. Preven, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Richard Ries, M.D.
Robert C. Risinger, M.D.
Robert Ronis, M.D.
Jerrold F. Rosenbaum, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Peter Roy-Byrne, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Mark Schmidt, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
S. Charles Schulz, M.D.
Bruce Schwartz, M.D.
Michael Schwartz, M.D.
(also Site Coordinator)
Michael J. Sernyak, M.D.
Richard Swinson, M.D.
Madhukar H. Trivedi, M.D.
Andrea Weiss, M.D.
Kerrin White, M.D.
Lawrence Wilson, M.D.
John Worthington, M.D.
Joan Youchah, M.D.
Other Health Organizations
At the inception of the project, the Task Force on DSM-IV invited over 60 health
associations to designate liaisons to the Task Force to ensure the openness of the revision
process and to ensure that a variety of views would be represented. The associations
listed below designated representatives who received regular communications from the
Work Groups and the Task Force.
American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry
American Academy of Family Physicians
American Academy of Pediatrics
American Academy of Psychiatrists in
Alcoholism and Addictions
American Academy of Psychiatry and
the Law
American Association for Geriatric
Psychiatry
American Association for Marriage and
Family Therapy
American Association of Chairmen of
Departments of Psychiatry
American Association of Directors of
Psychiatric Residency Training
American Association of Psychiatric
Administrators
American Board of Family Practice
American College of Obstetricians and
GynecologistsDSM-IV Contributors
American College of Physicians
American Group Psychotherapy
Association
American Health Information
Management Association
American Medical Society on Alcohol
and Other Drug Dependencies
American Nurses' Association
American Occupational Therapy
Association
American Psychoanalytic Association
American Psychological Association
American Psychological Society
American Psychosomatic Society, Inc.
American Society for Adolescent
Psychiatry
Association of Departments of Family
Medicine
Association of Gay and Lesbian
Psychiatrists
873
Association of Mental Health Clergy
Coalition for the Family
Group for the Advancement of
Psychiatry
National Alliance for the Mentally 111
National Association of Social Workers
National Association of Veterans Affairs
Chiefs of Psychiatry
National Center for Health Statistics
National Council of Community Mental
Health Centers
National Depressive and Manic
Depressive Association
National Medical Association
National Mental Health Association
Society of General Internal Medicine
Society of Teachers of Family Medicine
World Health OrganizationThis page intentionally left blankIndex
Page numbers for diagnostic criteria are enclosed in parentheses.
A
Abuse of substances, 182 (182)
See also specific substances by name
Abuse or neglect problems
Neglect of child, 682
Physical abuse of adult, 682
Physical abuse of child, 682
Sexual abuse of adult, 682
Sexual abuse of child, 682
Academic problem, 685
See also Learning disorders
Academic skills disorders. See Learning
disorders
Acculturation problem, 685
Acute stress disorder, 429 (431)
Additional codes, 687
Adjustment disorders, 623
With anxiety, 624 (626)
With depressed mood, 623 (626)
With disturbance of conduct, 624
(626)
With mixed anxiety and depressed
mood, 624 (626)
With mixed disturbance of emotions
and conduct, 624 (626)
Unspecified, 624 (626)
Adolescent antisocial behavior, 684
Adult antisocial behavior, 683
Adverse effects of medication not
otherwise specified, 680
Age-related cognitive decline, 684
Agoraphobia, 396 (396)
Panic disorder with, 397 (402)
Without history of panic disorder,
403 (404)
Akathisia, acute
Neuroleptic-induced, 679, 744
(746)
Alcohol-induced disorders
Intoxication, 196 (197)
Other disorders, 199
Withdrawal, 197 (198)
Alcohol-related disorders, 194
Not otherwise specified, 204
Alcohol use disorders
Abuse, 196
Dependence, 195
Alzheimer's type dementia, 139 (142)
Amnesia. See Amnestic disorders;
Dissociative amnesia
Amnestic disorders, 156
Due to a general medical condition,
158 (160)
Not otherwise specified, 163
Substance-induced persisting
amnestic disorder, l6l (162)
Amphetamine-induced disorders
Intoxication, 207 (207)
Other disorders, 209
Withdrawal, 208 (209)
Amphetamine (or amphetamine-like)-
related disorders, 204
Not otherwise specified, 211
875876
Index
Amphetamine use disorders
Abuse, 206
Dependence, 206
Anorexia nervosa, 539 (544)
Antisocial behavior
Adult, 683
Child or adolescent, 684
Antisocial personality disorder, 645 (649)
Anxiety disorders, 393
Acute stress disorder, 429 (431)
Agoraphobia, 396 (396)
Panic disorder with, 397 (402)
Without history of panic disorder,
403 (404)
Due to a general medical condition,
436 (439)
Generalized anxiety disorder
(includes overanxious disorder of
childhood), 432 (435)
Not otherwise specified, 444
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, 417
(422)
Panic attack, 394 (395)
Panic disorder, 397 (402)
With agoraphobia, 397 (402)
Without agoraphobia, 397 (402)
Posttraumatic stress disorder, 424 (427)
Separation anxiety disorder, 110
(113)
Social phobia (social anxiety
disorder), 411 (416)
Specific phobia, 405 (410)
Substance-induced anxiety disorder,
439 (443)
Anxiolytic-related disorders. See
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-related disorders
Arousal disorders. See Sexual arousal
disorders
Asperger's disorder, 75 (77)
Attention-deficit and disruptive behavior
disorders, 78
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, 78 (83)
Combined type, 80 (83)
Predominantly hyperactive-
impulsive type, 80 (83)
Predominantly inattentive type,
80 (83)
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder not otherwise specified,
85
Conduct disorder, 85 (90)
Disruptive behavior disorder not
otherwise specified, 94
Oppositional defiant disorder, 91 (93)
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder,
78 (83)
Not otherwise specified, 85
Atypical autism, 77
Atypical features specifier for mood
episode, 384 (385)
Autistic disorder, 66 (70)
Avoidant personality disorder, 662
(664)
B
Bereavement, 684
Binge-eating disorder, 729 (731)
Bipolar disorders
Bipolar I disorder
Most recent episode depressed,
350 (357)
Most recent episode hypomanic,
350 (356)
Most recent episode manic, 350
(356)
Most recent episode mixed, 350
(357)
Most recent episode unspecified,
350 (358)
Single manic episode, 350 (355)
Bipolar II disorder (recurrent major
depressive episodes with
hypomanic episodes), 359 (362)
Cyclothymic disorder, 363 (365)
Not otherwise specified, 366
Body dysmorphic disorder, 466 (468)
Borderline intellectual functioning, 684
Borderline personality disorder, 650
(654)
Breathing-related sleep disorder, 567
(573)
Brief psychotic disorder, 302 (304)
Bulimia nervosa, 545 (549)Index
c
Caffeine-induced disorders
Intoxication, 212 (213)
Other disorders, 213
Caffeine-related disorders, 212
Not otherwise specified, 215
Caffeine withdrawal, 708 (709)
Cannabis-induced disorders
Intoxication, 217 (218)
Other disorders, 218
Cannabis-related disorders, 215
Not otherwise specified, 221
Cannabis use disorders
Abuse, 217
Dependence, 216
Catatonic disorder
Due to a general medical condition,
169 (170)
Catatonic features specifier for mood
episode, 382 (383)
Catatonic type of schizophrenia, 288
(289)
Child antisocial behavior, 684
Childhood disintegrative disorder, 73
(74)
Child or adolescent antisocial behavior,
684
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder, 103
(104)
Chronic specifier for mood episode, 382
(382)
Circadian rhythm sleep disorder, 573
(578)
Cocaine-induced disorders
Intoxication, 223 (224)
Other disorders, 226
Withdrawal, 225 (225)
Cocaine-related disorders, 221
Not otherwise specified, 229
Cocaine use disorders
Abuse, 223
Dependence, 222
Cognitive disorders
See also Amnestic disorders;
Delirium; Dementia
Age-related cognitive decline,
684
Not otherwise specified, 163
877
Communication disorders, 55
Expressive language disorder, 55 (58)
Mixed receptive-expressive language
disorder, 58 (60)
Not otherwise specified, 65
Phonological disorder, 6l (63)
Stuttering, 63 (65)
Conduct disorder, 85 (90)
Conversion disorder, 452 (457)
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Dementia due to, 150 (151)
Culture-bound syndromes, 843-849
Cyclothymic disorder, 363 (365)
D
Defensive Functioning Scale, 751-757
Delirium, 124
Due to a general medical condition,
127 (129)
Due to multiple etiologies, 132 (132)
Not otherwise specified, 133
Substance-induced, 129 (131)
Delirium, dementia, and amnestic and
other cognitive disorders, 123
Amnestic disorders, 156
Cognitive disorder not otherwise
specified, 163
Delirium, 124
Dementia, 133
Delusional disorder, 296 (301)
Dementia, 133
of the Alzheimer's type, 139 (142)
Due to multiple etiologies, 154 (155)
Due to other general medical
conditions, 146, 151 (151)
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 150 (151)
Head trauma, 148 (151)
HIV disease, 148 (151)
Huntington's disease, 149 (151)
Parkinson's disease, 148 (151)
Pick's disease, 149 (151)
Not otherwise specified, 155
Substance-induced persisting
dementia, 152 (154)
Vascular, 143 (146)
Dependence on substances, 176 (181)
See also specific substances by name878
Index
Dependent personality disorder, 665 (668)
Depersonalization disorder, 488 (490)
Depressive disorders
Dysthymic disorder, 345 (349)
Major depressive disorder
Recurrent, 339 (345)
Single episode, 339 (344)
Not otherwise specified, 350
Depressive episode, major, 320 (327)
Depressive personality disorder, 732
(733)
Developmental articulation disorder. See
Phonological disorder
Developmental coordination disorder,
53 (54)
Developmental disorders. See Learning
disorders; Mental retardation;
Pervasive developmental disorders
Diagnosis deferred on Axis II, 687
Diagnosis or condition deferred on
Axis I, 687
Disorder of infancy, childhood, or
adolescence not otherwise
specified, 121
Disorder of written expression, 51 (53)
Disorders usually first diagnosed in
infancy, childhood, or
adolescence, 37
Attention-deficit and disruptive
behavior disorders, 78
Communication disorders, 55
Disorder of infancy, childhood, or
adolescence not otherwise
specified, 121
Elimination disorders, 106
Feeding and eating disorders of
infancy or early childhood, 94
Learning disorders, 46
Mental retardation, 39
Motor skills disorder, 53
Pervasive developmental disorders, 65
Reactive attachment disorder of
infancy or early childhood, 116
(118)
Selective mutism, 114 (115)
Separation anxiety disorder, 110 (113)
Stereotypic movement disorder, 118
(121)
Tic disorders, 100
Disorganized type of schizophrenia, 287
(288)
Disruptive behavior disorders. See
Attention-deficit and disruptive
behavior disorders
Dissociative amnesia, 478 (481)
Dissociative disorders, 477
Depersonalization disorder, 488 (490)
Dissociative amnesia, 478 (481)
Dissociative fugue, 481 (484)
Dissociative identity disorder, 484
(487)
Not otherwise specified, 490
Dissociative fugue, 481 (484)
Dissociative identity disorder, 484 (487)
Dissociative trance disorder, 727 (728)
Dream anxiety disorder. See Nightmare
disorder
Dyspareunia
Due to a general medical condition,
515 (518)
Not due to a general medical
condition, 511 (513)
Dyssomnias, 553
Breathing-related sleep disorder, 567
(573)
Circadian rhythm sleep disorder, 573
(578)
Narcolepsy, 562 (567)
Not otherwise specified, 579
Primary hypersomnia, 557 (562)
Primary insomnia, 553 (557)
Dysthymic disorder, 345 (349)
Alternative research criterion B, 718
(718)
Dystonia, acute
Neuroleptic-induced, 679, 742 (743)
E
Eating disorders, 539
See also Feeding and eating disorders
of infancy or early childhood
Anorexia nervosa, 539 (544)
Bulimia nervosa, 545 (549)
Not otherwise specified, 550
Elective mutism. See Selective mutismIndex
Elimination disorders. See Encopresis;
Enuresis
Encopresis
With constipation and overflow
incontinence, 106 (107)
Without constipation and overflow
incontinence, 106 (107)
Enuresis (not due to a general medical
condition), 108 (109)
Erectile disorder, male, 502 (504)
Due to a general medical condition,
515 (518)
Exhibitionism, 525 (526)
Expressive language disorder, 55 (58)
F
Factitious disorder by proxy, 725 (727)
Factitious disorders, 471
Not otherwise specified, 475
With combined psychological and
physical signs and symptoms, 473
(474)
With predominantly physical signs
and symptoms, 472 (474)
With predominantly psychological
signs and symptoms, 472 (474)
Feeding and eating disorders of infancy
or early childhood, 94
Feeding disorder of infancy or early
childhood, 98 (99)
Pica, 95 (96)
Rumination disorder, 96 (98)
Feeding disorder of infancy or early
childhood, 98 (99)
Female orgasmic disorder, 505 (506)
Female sexual arousal disorder, 500
(502)
Fetishism, 526 (526)
Transvestic, 530 (531)
Flashbacks. See Hallucinogen persisting
perception disorder (flashbacks)
Folie a deux. See Shared psychotic
disorder
Frotteurism, 527 (527)
Fugue. See Dissociative fugue
879
G
GAP Scale. See Global Assessment of
Functioning Scale
Gambling. See Pathological gambling
GARF Scale. See Global Assessment of
Relational Functioning Scale
Gender identity disorder, 532 (538)
in adolescents or adults, (538)
in children, (538)
Not otherwise specified, 538
General medical condition
Amnestic disorder due to, 158 (160)
Anxiety disorder due to, 436 (439)
Catatonic disorder due to, 169 (170)
Delirium due to, 127 (129)
Dementia due to, 139-152
Mental disorder due to, 166
Mental disorder not otherwise
specified due to, 174
Mood disorder due to, 366 (369)
Pain disorder associated with, 458
(461)
Personality change due to, 171 (173)
Psychotic disorder due to, 306 (309)
Relational problem related to, 681
Sexual dysfunction due to, 515 (518)
Sleep disorder due to, 597 (600)
Generalized anxiety disorder (includes
overanxious disorder of
childhood), 432 (435)
Global Assessment of Functioning
(GAP) Scale, 32
Global Assessment of Relational
Functioning (GARF) Scale, 758-759
H
Hallucinogen-induced disorders
Hallucinogen persisting perception
disorder (flashbacks), 233 (234)
Intoxication, 232 (232)
Other disorders, 234
Hallucinogen-related disorders, 229
Not otherwise specified, 236
Hallucinogen use disorders
Abuse, 231
Dependence, 230880
Index
Head trauma
Dementia due to, 148 (151)
Histrionic personality disorder, 655 (657)
HIV disease
Dementia due to, 148 (151)
Huntington's disease
Dementia due to, 149 (151)
Hyperactivity. See Attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder
Hypersomnia
Primary, 557 (562)
Related to another mental disorder,
592 (597)
Substance-induced, 601 (606)
Hypnotic-related disorders. See
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-related disorders
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder, 496
(498)
Due to a general medical condition,
515 (518)
Hypochondriasis, 462 (465)
Hypomanic episode, 335 (338)
I
Identity disorders. See Dissociative
identity disorder; Gender identity
disorder
Identity problem, 685
Impulse-control disorders not elsewhere
classified, 609
Intermittent explosive disorder, 609
(612)
Kleptomania, 612 (613)
Not otherwise specified, 621
Pathological gambling, 615 (618)
Pyromania, 614 (615)
Trichotillomania, 618 (621)
Inhalant-induced disorders
Intoxication, 239 (239)
Other disorders, 240
Inhalant-related disorders, 236
Not otherwise specified, 242
Inhalant use disorders
Abuse, 238
Dependence, 238
Inhibited female orgasm. See Female
orgasmic disorder
Inhibited male orgasm. See Male
orgasmic disorder
Insomnia
Primary, 553 (557)
Related to another mental disorder,
592 (596)
Substance-induced, 601 (606)
Intellectual functioning. See Borderline
intellectual functioning
Intermittent explosive disorder, 609
(612)
Intoxication, 183 (184)
See also specific substances by name
K
Kleptomania, 612 (613)
L
Learning disorders, 46
Disorder of written expression, 51
(53)
Mathematics disorder, 50 (51)
Not otherwise specified, 53
Reading disorder, 48 (50)
Longitudinal course specifiers (with
and without full interepisode
recovery) for mood disorders, 387
(389)
M
Major depressive disorder
Recurrent, 339 (345)
Single episode, 339 (344)
Major depressive episode, 320 (327)
Male erectile disorder, 502 (504)
Due to a general medical condition,
515 (518)
Male orgasmic disorder, 507 (509)
Malingering, 683
Manic episode, 328 (332)
Mathematics disorder, 50 (51)Index
Medication-induced disorder
Adverse effects of medication not
otherwise specified, 680
Medication-induced movement
disorders, 678, 735
Neuroleptic-induced acute akathisia,
679, 744 (746)
Neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia,
679, 742 (743)
Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism,
679, 736 (738)
Neuroleptic-induced tardive
dyskinesia, 679, 747 (749)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome,
679, 739 (741)
Not otherwise specified, 680, 751
Postural tremor, 680, 749 (751)
Melancholic features specifier for mood
episode, 383 (384)
Mental disorder not otherwise specified
due to a general medical
condition, 174
Mental retardation, 39 (46)
Mild, 41 (46)
Moderate, 41 (46)
Profound, 41 (46)
Severe, 41 (46)
Severity unspecified, 42 (46)
Mild mental retardation, 41 (46)
Mild neurocognitive disorder, 706 (708)
Minor depressive disorder, 719 (720)
Mixed anxiety-depressive disorder, 723
(724)
Mixed episode, 333 (335)
Mixed receptive-expressive language
disorder, 58 (60)
Moderate mental retardation, 41 (46)
Mood disorders, 317
See also Mood episodes
Bipolar disorders, 350
Depressive disorders, 339
Due to a general medical condition,
366 (369)
Not otherwise specified, 375
Substance-induced mood disorder,
370 (374)
Mood disorders, specifiers for
Atypical features specifier, 384 (385)
Catatonic features specifier, 382 (383)
881
Chronic specifier, 382 (382)
Longitudinal course specifiers (with
and without full interepisode
recovery), 387 (389)
Melancholic features specifier, 383
(384)
Postpartum onset specifier, 386 (387)
Rapid-cycling specifier, 390 (391)
Seasonal pattern specifier, 389 (390)
Severity/psychotic/remission
specifiers
Major depressive episode, 376 (377)
Manic episode, 378 (379)
Mixed episode, 380 (381)
Mood episodes
Hypomanic episode, 335 (338)
Major depressive episode, 320 (327)
Manic episode, 328 (332)
Mixed episode, 333 (335)
Motor or vocal tic disorder, chronic. See
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder
Motor skills disorder, 53
Developmental coordination
disorder, 53 (54)
Multi-infarct dementia. See Vascular
dementia
Multiple etiologies
Delirium due to, 132 (132)
Dementia due to, 154 (155)
Multiple personality disorder. See
Dissociative identity disorder
N
Narcissistic personality disorder, 658 (661)
Narcolepsy, 562 (567)
Neglect of child, 682
Neuroleptic-induced disorders
Acute akathisia, 679, 744 (746)
Acute dystonia, 679, 742 (743)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome,
679, 739 (741)
Parkinsonism, 679, 736 (738)
Tardive dyskinesia, 679, 747 (749)
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 679,
739 (741)
Nicotine-induced disorder
Withdrawal, 244 (244)882
Index
Nicotine-related disorders, 242
Not otherwise specified, 247
Nicotine use disorder
Dependence, 243
Nightmare disorder, 580 (583)
No diagnosis on Axis II, 687
No diagnosis or condition on Axis I, 687
Noncompliance with treatment, 683
Not otherwise specified
Adverse effects of medication, 680
Alcohol-related disorder, 204
Amnestic disorder, 163
Amphetamine-related disorder, 211
Anxiety disorder, 444
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, 85
Bipolar disorder, 366
Caffeine-related disorder, 215
Cannabis-related disorder, 221
Cocaine-related disorder, 229
Cognitive disorder, 163
Communication disorder, 65
Delirium, 133
Dementia, 155
Depressive disorder, 350
Disorder of infancy, childhood, or
adolescence, 121
Disruptive behavior disorder, 94
Dissociative disorder, 490
Dyssomnia, 579
Eating disorder, 550
Factitious disorder, 475
Gender identity disorder, 538
Hallucinogen-related disorder, 236
Impulse-control disorder, 621
Inhalant-related disorder, 242
Learning disorder, 53
Medication-induced movement
disorder, 680, 752
Mental disorder due to a general
medical condition, 174
Mood disorder, 375
Nicotine-related disorder, 247
Opioid-related disorder, 255
Other (or unknown) substance-
related disorder, 272
Paraphilia, 532
Parasomnia, 592
Personality disorder, 673
Pervasive developmental disorder
(including atypical autism), 77
Phencyclidine (or phencyclidine-
like)-related disorder, 261
Psychotic disorder, 315
Relational problem, 681
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-related disorder, 269
Sexual disorder, 538
Somatoform disorder, 468
Tic disorder, 105
o
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, 417 (422)
Obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, 669 (672)
Occupational problem, 685
Opioid-induced disorders
Intoxication, 249 (250)
Other disorders, 252
Withdrawal, 250 (251)
Opioid-related disorders, 247
Not otherwise specified, 255
Opioid use disorders
Abuse, 249
Dependence, 248
Oppositional defiant disorder, 91 (93)
Orgasmic disorders
Female orgasmic disorder, 505 (506)
Male orgasmic disorder, 507 (509)
Premature ejaculation, 509 (511)
Overanxious disorder of childhood. See
Generalized anxiety disorder
P
Pain disorder
See also Sexual pain disorders
Associated with a general medical
condition, 458 (46l)
Associated with both psychological
factors and a general medical
condition, 458 (461)
Associated with psychological
factors, 458 (46l)
Panic attack, 394 (395)Index
Panic disorder, 397 (402)
With agoraphobia, 397 (402)
Without agoraphobia, 397 (402)
Paranoid personality disorder, 634 (637)
Paranoid type of schizophrenia, 287 (287)
Paraphilias, 522
Exhibitionism, 525 (526)
Fetishism, 526 (526)
Frotteurism, 527 (527)
Not otherwise specified, 532
Pedophilia, 527 (528)
Sexual masochism, 529 (529)
Sexual sadism, 530 (530)
Transvestic fetishism, 530 (531)
Voyeurism, 532 (532)
Parasomnias, 579
Nightmare disorder, 580 (583)
Not otherwise specified, 592
Sleep terror disorder, 583 (587)
Sleepwalking disorder, 587 (591)
Parent-child relational problem, 681
Parkinsonism
Neuroleptic-induced, 679, 736 (738)
Parkinson's disease
Dementia due to, 148 (151)
Partner relational problem, 681
Passive-aggressive personality disorder
(negativistic personality disorder),
733 (734)
Pathological gambling, 615 (618)
Pedophilia, 527 (528)
Personality change due to a general
medical condition, 171 (173)
Personality disorders, 629 (633)
Antisocial personality disorder, 645
(649)
Avoidant personality disorder, 662
(664)
Borderline personality disorder, 650
(654)
Dependent personality disorder, 665
(668)
Histrionic personality disorder, 655
(657)
Narcissistic personality disorder, 658
(661)
Not otherwise specified, 673
Obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, 669 (672)
883
Paranoid personality disorder, 634
(637)
Schizoid personality disorder, 638
(641)
Schizotypal personality disorder, 641
(645)
Pervasive developmental disorders, 65
Asperger's disorder, 75 (77)
Autistic disorder, 66 (70)
Childhood disintegrative disorder, 73
(74)
Not otherwise specified (including
atypical autism), 77
Rett's disorder, 71 (72)
Phase of life problem, 685
Phencyclidine-induced disorders
Intoxication, 257 (258)
Other disorders, 259
Phencyclidine (or phencyclidine-like)-
related disorders, 255
Not otherwise specified, 26l
Phencyclidine use disorders
Abuse, 257
Dependence, 256
Phonological disorder, 6l (63)
Physical abuse
of adult, 682
of child, 682
Pica, 95 (96)
Pick's disease
Dementia due to, 149 (151)
Polysubstance-related disorder
Polysubstance dependence, 270
Postconcussional disorder, 704 (705)
Postpartum onset specifier for mood
episode, 386 (387)
Postpsychotic depressive disorder of
schizophrenia, 711 (712)
Posttraumatic stress disorder, 424 (427)
Postural tremor, medication-induced,
680, 749 (751)
Premature ejaculation, 509 (511)
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder, 715
(717)
Primary hypersomnia, 557 (562)
Primary insomnia, 553 (557)
Primary sleep disorders
Dyssomnias, 553
Parasomnias, 579884
Index
Profound mental retardation, 41 (46)
Psychogenic amnesia. See Dissociative
amnesia
Psychogenic fugue. See Dissociative
fugue
Psychological factor affecting medical
condition, 675 (678)
Psychotic disorders
Brief psychotic disorder, 302 (304)
Delusional disorder, 296 (301)
Due to a general medical condition,
306 (309)
Not otherwise specified, 315
Schizoaffective disorder, 292 (295)
Schizophrenia, 274 (285)
Schizophreniform disorder, 290 (291)
Shared psychotic disorder, 305 (306)
Substance-induced psychotic
disorder, 310 (314)
Psychotic features specifiers
Major depressive episode, 376 (377)
Manic episode, 378 (379)
Mixed episode, 380 (381)
Pyromania, 6l4 (615)
R
Rapid-cycling specifier for mood
disorder, 390 (391)
Reactive attachment disorder of infancy
or early childhood, 116 (118)
Reading disorder, 48 (50)
Recurrent brief depressive disorder, 721
(723)
Relational problems, 680
Not otherwise specified, 681
Parent-child relational problem, 681
Partner relational problem, 681
Related to a mental disorder or
general medical condition, 681
Sibling relational problem, 681
Religious or spiritual problem, 685
Residual type of schizophrenia, 289
(290)
Rett's disorder, 71 (72)
Rumination disorder, 96 (98)
s
Schizoaffective disorder, 292 (295)
Schizoid personality disorder, 638 (641)
Schizophrenia, 274 (285)
Alternative dimensional descriptors,
710 (710)
Catatonic type, 288 (289)
Disorganized type, 287 (288)
Paranoid type, 287 (287)
Residual type, 289 (290)
Undifferentiated type, 289 (289)
Schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders. See Psychotic disorders;
Schizophrenia
Schizophreniform disorder, 290 (291)
Schizotypal personality disorder, 641 (645)
Seasonal pattern specifier for mood
disorder, 389 (390)
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
induced disorders
Intoxication, 263 (264)
Other disorders, 266
Withdrawal, 264 (266)
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
related disorders, 261
Not otherwise specified, 269
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorders
Abuse, 263
Dependence, 262
Selective mutism, 114 (115)
Separation anxiety disorder, 110 (113)
Severe mental retardation, 41 (46)
Severity/psychotic/remission specifiers
Major depressive episode, 376 (377)
Manic episode, 378 (379)
Mixed episode, 380 (381)
Severity unspecified mental retardation,
42 (46)
Sexual abuse
of adult, 682
of child, 682
Sexual arousal disorders
Female sexual arousal disorder, 500 (502)
Male erectile disorder, 502 (504)
Due to a general medical
condition, 515 (518)
Sexual aversion disorder, 499 (500)Index
Sexual desire disorders
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder,
496 (498)
Due to a general medical
condition, 515 (518)
Sexual aversion disorder, 499 (500)
Sexual disorders
See also Paraphilias; Sexual
dysfunctions
Not otherwise specified, 538
Sexual dysfunctions, 493
Due to a general medical condition,
515 (518)
Not otherwise specified, 522
Orgasmic disorders
Female orgasmic disorder, 505 (506)
Male orgasmic disorder, 507 (509)
Premature ejaculation, 509 (511)
Sexual arousal disorders
Female sexual arousal disorder,
500 (502)
Male erectile disorder, 502 (504)
Due to a general medical
condition, 515 (518)
Sexual desire disorders
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder,
496 (498)
Due to a general medical
condition, 515 (518)
Sexual aversion disorder, 499 (500)
Sexual pain disorders
Dyspareunia
Due to a general medical
condition, 515 (518)
Not due to a general medical
condition, 511 (513)
Vaginismus (not due to a general
medical condition), 513 (515)
Substance-induced sexual
dysfunction, 519 (521)
Sexual masochism, 529 (529)
Sexual pain disorders
Dyspareunia
Due to a general medical
condition, 515 (518)
Not due to a general medical
condition, 511 (513)
Vaginismus (not due to a general
medical condition), 513 (515)
885
Sexual sadism, 530 (530)
Shared psychotic disorder, 305 (306)
Sibling relational problem, 681
Simple deteriorative disorder (simple
schizophrenia), 713 (714)
Simple phobia. See Specific phobia
Sleep disorders, 551
Due to a general medical condition,
597 (600)
Hypersomnia type, (601)
Insomnia type, (601)
Mixed type, (601)
Parasomnia type, (601)
Primary sleep disorders
Dyssomnias, 553
Parasomnias, 579
Related to another mental disorder
Hypersomnia related to another
mental disorder, 592 (597)
Insomnia related to another
mental disorder, 592 (596)
Substance-induced sleep disorder,
601 (606)
Sleep terror disorder, 583 (587)
Sleep-wake schedule disorder. See
Circadian rhythm sleep disorder
Sleepwalking disorder, 587 (591)
Social and Occupational Functioning
Assessment Scale (SOFAS),
760-761
Social anxiety disorder. See Social
phobia (social anxiety disorder)
Social phobia (social anxiety disorder),
411 (416)
SOFAS. See Social and Occupational
Functioning Assessment Scale
Somatization disorder, 446 (449)
Somatoform disorders, 445
Body dysmorphic disorder, 466
(468)
Conversion disorder, 452 (457)
Hypochondriasis, 462 (465)
Not otherwise specified, 468
Pain disorder
Associated with a general medical
condition, 458 (46l)
Associated with both psychological
factors and a general medical
condition, 458 (461)886
Index
Somatoform disorders (continued)
Pain disorder (continued)
Associated with psychological
factors, 458 (46l)
Somatization disorder, 446 (449)
Undifferentiated somatoform
disorder, 450 (451)
Specific phobia, 405 (410)
Spiritual problem. See Religious or
spiritual problem
Stereotypic movement disorder, 118
(121)
Stereotypy/habit disorder. See
Stereotypic movement disorder
Stress disorder. See Acute stress disorder
Stuttering, 63 (65)
Substance-induced disorders, 183-194
See also specific substances by name
Anxiety disorder, 439 (443)
Delirium, 129 (13D
Hallucinogen persisting perception
disorder, 233 (234)
Intoxication, 183 (184)
Mood disorder, 370 (374)
Persisting amnestic disorder, 161 (162)
Persisting dementia, 152 (154)
Psychotic disorder, 310 (314)
Sexual dysfunction, 519 (521)
Sleep disorder, 601 (606)
Withdrawal, 184 (185)
Substance-related disorders, 175
See also specific substances by name
Other (or unknown) disorders, 270
Substance use disorders, 176
See also specific substances by name
Abuse, 182 (182)
Dependence, 176 (181)
T
Tardive dyskinesia
Neuroleptic-induced, 679, 747 (749)
Tic disorders, 100
Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder,
103 (104)
Not otherwise specified, 105
Tourette's disorder, 101 (103)
Transient tic disorder, 104 (105)
Tourette's disorder, 101 (103)
Transient tic disorder, 104 (105)
Transvestic fetishism, 530 (531)
Tremor. See Postural tremor,
medication-induced
Trichotillomania, 618 (621)
u
Undifferentiated somatoform disorder,
450 (451)
Undifferentiated type of schizophrenia,
289 (289)
Unspecified mental disorder
(nonpsychotic), 687
V
Vaginismus (not due to a general
medical condition), 513 (515)
Vascular dementia, 143 (146)
Vocal tic disorders. See Chronic motor
or vocal tic disorder
Voyeurism, 532 (532)
w
Withdrawal from substances, 184 (185)
See also specific substances by name
Written expression, disorder of, 51 (53)
